The Project Gutenberg eBook of Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle

ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES


CONTENTS


ILLUSTRATIONS


ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES Adventure I A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIAI


Adventure II THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE



Adventure III A CASE OF IDENTITY



Adventure IV THE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY



Adventure V THE FIVE ORANGE PIPS



Adventure VI THE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP



Adventure VII THE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE



Adventure VIII THE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND



Adventure IX THE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER’S THUMB



Adventure X THE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELOR



Adventure XI THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET



Adventure XII THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.



Title: Adventures of Sherlock Holmes



Author: Arthur Conan Doyle


Release date: February 20, 2015 [EBook #48320]



Language: English



Credits: Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team athttp://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from imagesgenerously made available by The Internet Archive/AmericanLibraries.)







*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***







Ebook cover prepared by the transcriber and placed in the public domain.



















ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES







“THE GENTLEMAN IN THE PEW HANDED IT UP TO HER”



ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES

BYA. CONAN DOYLEAUTHOR OF “MICAH CLARKE” ETC.

ILLUSTRATED

NEW YORK HARPER & BROTHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE

Copyright, 1892, by Harper & Brothers.

All rights reserved.

CONTENTS

ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES

Adventure IA SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA

I

TO Sherlock Holmes she is always the woman. I have seldom heardhim mention her under any other name. In his eyes she eclipses andpredominates the whole of her sex. It was not that he felt any emotionakin to love for Irene Adler. All emotions, and that one particularly,

were abhorrent to his cold, precise, but admirably balanced mind. Hewas, I take it, the most perfect reasoning and observing machine thatthe world has seen; but, as a lover, he would have placed himself in afalse position. He never spoke of the softer passions, save with a gibeand a sneer. They were admirable things for the observer—excellentfor drawing the veil from men’s motives and actions. But for thetrained reasoner to admit such intrusions into his own delicate andfinely adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor whichmight throw a doubt upon all his mental results. Grit in a sensitiveinstrument, or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses, would notbe more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his. Andyet there was but one woman to him, and that woman was the late IreneAdler, of dubious and questionable memory.







I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us awayfrom each other. My own complete happiness, and the home-centredinterests which rise up around the man who first finds himself masterof his own establishment, were sufficient to absorb all my attention;while Holmes, who loathed every form of society with his wholeBohemian soul, remained in our lodgings in Baker Street, buried amonghis old books, and alternating from week to week between cocaine andambition, the drowsiness of the drug, and the fierce energy of hisown keen nature. He was still, as ever, deeply attracted by the studyof crime, and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powersof observation in following out those clues, and clearing up thosemysteries, which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police.

From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings: of hissummons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder, of his clearingup of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee,

and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so delicately andsuccessfully for the reigning family of Holland. Beyond these signs ofhis activity, however, which I merely shared with all the readers ofthe daily press, I knew little of my former friend and companion.



One night—it was on the 20th of March, 1888—I was returning from ajourney to a patient (for I had now returned to civil practice), whenmy way led me through Baker Street. As I passed the well-remembereddoor, which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing, andwith the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet, I was seized with akeen desire to see Holmes again, and to know how he was employing hisextraordinary powers. His rooms were brilliantly lit, and, even as Ilooked up, I saw his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouetteagainst the blind. He was pacing the room swiftly, eagerly, with hishead sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him. To me, whoknew his every mood and habit, his attitude and manner told their ownstory. He was at work again. He had arisen out of his drug-createddreams, and was hot upon the scent of some new problem. I rang thebell, and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in partmy own.



His manner was not effusive. It seldom was; but he was glad, I think,

to see me. With hardly a word spoken, but with a kindly eye, he wavedme to an arm-chair, threw across his case of cigars, and indicated aspirit case and a gasogene in the corner. Then he stood before thefire, and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion.



“Wedlock suits you,” he remarked. “I think, Watson, that you have puton seven and a half pounds since I saw you.”



“Seven!” I answered.



“Indeed, I should have thought a little more. Just a trifle more, Ifancy, Watson. And in practice again, I observe. You did not tell methat you intended to go into harness.”



“Then, how do you know?”



“I see it, I deduce it. How do I know that you have been gettingyourself very wet lately, and that you have a most clumsy and carelessservant girl?”



“My dear Holmes,” said I, “this is too much. You would certainly havebeen burned, had you lived a few centuries ago. It is true that I hada country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess; but, as Ihave changed my clothes, I can’t imagine how you deduce it. As to MaryJane, she is incorrigible, and my wife has given her notice; but there,

again, I fail to see how you work it out.”



He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long, nervous hands together.



“It is simplicity itself,” said he; “my eyes tell me that on theinside of your left shoe, just where the firelight strikes it, theleather is scored by six almost parallel cuts. Obviously they havebeen caused by some one who has very carelessly scraped round theedges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it. Hence, yousee, my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather, andthat you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of theLondon slavey. As to your practice, if a gentleman walks into my roomssmelling of iodoform, with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon hisright forefinger, and a bulge on the side of his top-hat to show wherehe has secreted his stethoscope, I must be dull, indeed, if I do notpronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession.”



I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained hisprocess of deduction. “When I hear you give your reasons,” I remarked,

“the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that Icould easily do it myself, though at each successive instance of yourreasoning I am baffled, until you explain your process. And yet Ibelieve that my eyes are as good as yours.”



“Quite so,” he answered, lighting a cigarette, and throwing himselfdown into an arm-chair. “You see, but you do not observe. Thedistinction is clear. For example, you have frequently seen the stepswhich lead up from the hall to this room.”



“Frequently.”



“How often?”



“Well, some hundreds of times.”



“Then how many are there?”



“How many? I don’t know.”



“Quite so! You have not observed. And yet you have seen. That is justmy point. Now, I know that there are seventeen steps, because I haveboth seen and observed. By-the-way, since you are interested in theselittle problems, and since you are good enough to chronicle one or twoof my trifling experiences, you may be interested in this.” He threwover a sheet of thick, pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying openupon the table. “It came by the last post,” said he. “Read it aloud.”



The note was undated, and without either signature or address.



“There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight o’clock,”it said, “a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of thevery deepest moment. Your recent services to one of the royal housesof Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted withmatters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated.

This account of you we have from all quarters received. Be in yourchamber then at that hour, and do not take it amiss if your visitorwear a mask.”



“This is indeed a mystery,” I remarked. “What do you imagine that itmeans?”



“I have no data yet. It is a capital mistake to theorize before one hasdata. Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories, instead oftheories to suit facts. But the note itself. What do you deduce fromit?”



I carefully examined the writing, and the paper upon which it waswritten.



“The man who wrote it was presumably well to do,” I remarked,

endeavoring to imitate my companion’s processes. “Such paper could notbe bought under half a crown a packet. It is peculiarly strong andstiff.”



“Peculiar—that is the very word,” said Holmes. “It is not an Englishpaper at all. Hold it up to the light.”



I did so, and saw a large E with a small g, a P, and a large Gwith a small t woven into the texture of the paper.



“What do you make of that?” asked Holmes.



“The name of the maker, no doubt; or his monogram, rather.”



“Not at all. The G with the small t stands for ‘Gesellschaft,’which is the German for ‘Company.’ It is a customary contraction likeour ‘Co.’ P, of course, stands for ‘Papier.’ Now for the Eg. Let usglance at our Continental Gazetteer.” He took down a heavy brown volumefrom his shelves. “Eglow, Eglonitz—here we are, Egria. It is in aGerman-speaking country—in Bohemia, not far from Carlsbad. ‘Remarkableas being the scene of the death of Wallenstein, and for its numerousglass-factories and paper-mills.’ Ha, ha, my boy, what do you make ofthat?” His eyes sparkled, and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloudfrom his cigarette.



“The paper was made in Bohemia,” I said.



“Precisely. And the man who wrote the note is a German. Do you note thepeculiar construction of the sentence—‘This account of you we havefrom all quarters received.’ A Frenchman or Russian could not havewritten that. It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs. Itonly remains, therefore, to discover what is wanted by this Germanwho writes upon Bohemian paper, and prefers wearing a mask to showinghis face. And here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to resolve all ourdoubts.”



As he spoke there was the sharp sound of horses’ hoofs and gratingwheels against the curb, followed by a sharp pull at the bell. Holmeswhistled.



“A pair, by the sound,” said he. “Yes,” he continued, glancing out ofthe window. “A nice little brougham and a pair of beauties. A hundredand fifty guineas apiece. There’s money in this case, Watson, if thereis nothing else.”



“I think that I had better go, Holmes.”



“Not a bit, doctor. Stay where you are. I am lost without my Boswell.

And this promises to be interesting. It would be a pity to miss it.”



“But your client—”



“Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he comes.

Sit down in that arm-chair, doctor, and give us your best attention.”



A slow and heavy step, which had been heard upon the stairs and in thepassage, paused immediately outside the door. Then there was a loud andauthoritative tap.



“Come in!” said Holmes.







“A MAN ENTERED”













A man entered who could hardly have been less than six feet six inchesin height, with the chest and limbs of a Hercules. His dress was richwith a richness which would, in England, be looked upon as akin to badtaste. Heavy bands of Astrakhan were slashed across the sleeves andfronts of his double-breasted coat, while the deep blue cloak whichwas thrown over his shoulders was lined with flame-colored silk, andsecured at the neck with a brooch which consisted of a single flamingberyl. Boots which extended half-way up his calves, and which weretrimmed at the tops with rich brown fur, completed the impression ofbarbaric opulence which was suggested by his whole appearance. Hecarried a broad-brimmed hat in his hand, while he wore across the upperpart of his face, extending down past the cheekbones, a black vizardmask, which he had apparently adjusted that very moment, for his handwas still raised to it as he entered. From the lower part of the facehe appeared to be a man of strong character, with a thick, hanginglip, and a long, straight chin, suggestive of resolution pushed to thelength of obstinacy.



“You had my note?” he asked, with a deep harsh voice and a stronglymarked German accent. “I told you that I would call.” He looked fromone to the other of us, as if uncertain which to address.



“Pray take a seat,” said Holmes. “This is my friend and colleague, Dr.

Watson, who is occasionally good enough to help me in my cases. Whomhave I the honor to address?”



“You may address me as the Count Von Kramm, a Bohemian nobleman.

I understand that this gentleman, your friend, is a man of honorand discretion, whom I may trust with a matter of the most extremeimportance. If not, I should much prefer to communicate with you alone.”



I rose to go, but Holmes caught me by the wrist and pushed me back intomy chair. “It is both, or none,” said he. “You may say before thisgentleman anything which you may say to me.”



The count shrugged his broad shoulders. “Then I must begin,” said he,

“by binding you both to absolute secrecy for two years, at the end ofthat time the matter will be of no importance. At present it is not toomuch to say that it is of such weight it may have an influence uponEuropean history.”



“I promise,” said Holmes.



“And I.”



“You will excuse this mask,” continued our strange visitor. “The augustperson who employs me wishes his agent to be unknown to you, and I mayconfess at once that the title by which I have just called myself isnot exactly my own.”





“I was aware of it,” said Holmes, dryly.



“The circumstances are of great delicacy, and every precaution hasto be taken to quench what might grow to be an immense scandal andseriously compromise one of the reigning families of Europe. To speakplainly, the matter implicates the great House of Ormstein, hereditarykings of Bohemia.”



“I was also aware of that,” murmured Holmes, settling himself down inhis arm-chair and closing his eyes.



Our visitor glanced with some apparent surprise at the languid,

lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him asthe most incisive reasoner and most energetic agent in Europe. Holmesslowly reopened his eyes and looked impatiently at his gigantic client.



“If your Majesty would condescend to state your case,” he remarked, “Ishould be better able to advise you.”



The man sprang from his chair and paced up and down the room inuncontrollable agitation. Then, with a gesture of desperation, he torethe mask from his face and hurled it upon the ground. “You are right,”he cried; “I am the King. Why should I attempt to conceal it?”



“Why, indeed?” murmured Holmes. “Your Majesty had not spoken beforeI was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond vonOrmstein, Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein, and hereditary King ofBohemia.”



“But you can understand,” said our strange visitor, sitting down oncemore and passing his hand over his high, white forehead, “you canunderstand that I am not accustomed to doing such business in my ownperson. Yet the matter was so delicate that I could not confide it toan agent without putting myself in his power. I have come incognitofrom Prague for the purpose of consulting you.”



“Then, pray consult,” said Holmes, shutting his eyes once more.



“The facts are briefly these: Some five years ago, during a lengthyvisit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-knownadventuress, Irene Adler. The name is no doubt familiar to you.”



“Kindly look her up in my index, doctor,” murmured Holmes, withoutopening his eyes. For many years he had adopted a system of docketingall paragraphs concerning men and things, so that it was difficultto name a subject or a person on which he could not at once furnishinformation. In this case I found her biography sandwiched in betweenthat of a Hebrew Rabbi and that of a staff-commander who had written amonograph upon the deep-sea fishes.



“Let me see!” said Holmes. “Hum! Born in New Jersey in the year1858. Contralto—hum! La Scala, hum! Prima donna Imperial Opera ofWarsaw—Yes! Retired from operatic stage—ha! Living in London—quiteso! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled with this youngperson, wrote her some compromising letters, and is now desirous ofgetting those letters back.”



“Precisely so. But how—”



“Was there a secret marriage?”



“None.”



“No legal papers or certificates?”



“None.”



“Then I fail to follow your Majesty. If this young person shouldproduce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is she toprove their authenticity?”



“There is the writing.”



“Pooh, pooh! Forgery.”



“My private note-paper.”



“Stolen.”



“My own seal.”



“Imitated.”



“My photograph.”



“Bought.”



“We were both in the photograph.”



“Oh dear! That is very bad! Your Majesty has indeed committed anindiscretion.”





“I was mad—insane.”



“You have compromised yourself seriously.”



“I was only Crown Prince then. I was young. I am but thirty now.”



“It must be recovered.”



“We have tried and failed.”



“Your Majesty must pay. It must be bought.”



“She will not sell.”



“Stolen, then.”



“Five attempts have been made. Twice burglars in my pay ransacked herhouse. Once we diverted her luggage when she travelled. Twice she hasbeen waylaid. There has been no result.”



“No sign of it?”



“Absolutely none.”



Holmes laughed. “It is quite a pretty little problem,” said he.



“But a very serious one to me,” returned the King, reproachfully.



“Very, indeed. And what does she propose to do with the photograph?”



“To ruin me.”



“But how?”



“I am about to be married.”



“So I have heard.”



“To Clotilde Lothman von Saxe-Meningen, second daughter of the King ofScandinavia. You may know the strict principles of her family. She isherself the very soul of delicacy. A shadow of a doubt as to my conductwould bring the matter to an end.”



“And Irene Adler?”



“Threatens to send them the photograph. And she will do it. I know thatshe will do it. You do not know her, but she has a soul of steel. Shehas the face of the most beautiful of women, and the mind of the mostresolute of men. Rather than I should marry another woman, there areno lengths to which she would not go—none.”



“You are sure that she has not sent it yet?”



“I am sure.”



“And why?”



“Because she has said that she would send it on the day when thebetrothal was publicly proclaimed. That will be next Monday.”



“Oh, then, we have three days yet,” said Holmes, with a yawn. “That isvery fortunate, as I have one or two matters of importance to look intojust at present. Your Majesty will, of course, stay in London for thepresent?”



“Certainly. You will find me at the Langham, under the name of theCount Von Kramm.”



“Then I shall drop you a line to let you know how we progress.”



“Pray do so. I shall be all anxiety.”



“Then, as to money?”



“You have carte blanche.”



“Absolutely?”



“I tell you that I would give one of the provinces of my kingdom tohave that photograph.”



“And for present expenses?”



The king took a heavy chamois leather bag from under his cloak and laidit on the table.



“There are three hundred pounds in gold and seven hundred in notes,” hesaid.



Holmes scribbled a receipt upon a sheet of his note-book and handed itto him.



“And mademoiselle’s address?” he asked.



“Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. John’s Wood.”



Holmes took a note of it. “One other question,” said he. “Was thephotograph a cabinet?”



“It was.”



“Then, good-night, your Majesty, and I trust that we shall soon havesome good news for you. And good-night, Watson,” he added, as thewheels of the royal brougham rolled down the street. “If you will begood enough to call to-morrow afternoon, at three o’clock, I shouldlike to chat this little matter over with you.”



IIAt three o’clock precisely I was at Baker Street, but Holmes had notyet returned. The landlady informed me that he had left the houseshortly after eight o’clock in the morning. I sat down beside thefire, however, with the intention of awaiting him, however long hemight be. I was already deeply interested in his inquiry, for, thoughit was surrounded by none of the grim and strange features whichwere associated with the two crimes which I have already recorded,

still, the nature of the case and the exalted station of his clientgave it a character of its own. Indeed, apart from the nature of theinvestigation which my friend had on hand, there was something in hismasterly grasp of a situation, and his keen, incisive reasoning, whichmade it a pleasure to me to study his system of work, and to follow thequick, subtle methods by which he disentangled the most inextricablemysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable success that the verypossibility of his failing had ceased to enter into my head.



It was close upon four before the door opened, and a drunken-lookinggroom, ill-kempt and side-whiskered, with an inflamed face anddisreputable clothes, walked into the room. Accustomed as I was tomy friend’s amazing powers in the use of disguises, I had to lookthree times before I was certain that it was indeed he. With a nodhe vanished into the bedroom, whence he emerged in five minutestweed-suited and respectable, as of old. Putting his hands into hispockets, he stretched out his legs in front of the fire, and laughedheartily for some minutes.



“Well, really!” he cried, and then he choked; and laughed again untilhe was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the chair.



“What is it?”



“It’s quite too funny. I am sure you could never guess how I employedmy morning, or what I ended by doing.”



“I can’t imagine. I suppose that you have been watching the habits, andperhaps the house, of Miss Irene Adler.”



“Quite so; but the sequel was rather unusual. I will tell you, however.

I left the house a little after eight o’clock this morning, in thecharacter of a groom out of work. There is a wonderful sympathy andfreemasonry among horsey men. Be one of them, and you will know allthat there is to know. I soon found Briony Lodge. It is a bijouvilla, with a garden at the back, but built out in front right up tothe road, two stories. Chubb lock to the door. Large sitting-room onthe right side, well furnished, with long windows almost to the floor,

and those preposterous English window fasteners which a child couldopen. Behind there was nothing remarkable, save that the passage windowcould be reached from the top of the coach-house. I walked round itand examined it closely from every point of view, but without notinganything else of interest.



“I then lounged down the street, and found, as I expected, that therewas a mews in a lane which runs down by one wall of the garden. I lentthe ostlers a hand in rubbing down their horses, and I received inexchange twopence, a glass of half-and-half, two fills of shag tobacco,

and as much information as I could desire about Miss Adler, to saynothing of half a dozen other people in the neighborhood in whom I wasnot in the least interested, but whose biographies I was compelled tolisten to.”



“And what of Irene Adler?” I asked.



“Oh, she has turned all the men’s heads down in that part. Sheis the daintiest thing under a bonnet on this planet. So say theSerpentine-mews, to a man. She lives quietly, sings at concerts, drivesout at five every day, and returns at seven sharp for dinner. Seldomgoes out at other times, except when she sings. Has only one malevisitor, but a good deal of him. He is dark, handsome, and dashing,

never calls less than once a day, and often twice. He is a Mr. GodfreyNorton, of the Inner Temple. See the advantages of a cabman as aconfidant. They had driven him home a dozen times from Serpentine-mews,

and knew all about him. When I had listened to all that they had totell, I began to walk up and down near Briony Lodge once more, and tothink over my plan of campaign.



“This Godfrey Norton was evidently an important factor in thematter. He was a lawyer. That sounded ominous. What was the relationbetween them, and what the object of his repeated visits? Was shehis client, his friend, or his mistress? If the former, she hadprobably transferred the photograph to his keeping. If the latter,

it was less likely. On the issue of this question depended whether Ishould continue my work at Briony Lodge, or turn my attention to thegentleman’s chambers in the Temple. It was a delicate point, and itwidened the field of my inquiry. I fear that I bore you with thesedetails, but I have to let you see my little difficulties, if you areto understand the situation.”



“I am following you closely,” I answered.



“I was still balancing the matter in my mind, when a hansom cab droveup to Briony Lodge, and a gentleman sprang out. He was a remarkablyhandsome man, dark, aquiline, and mustached—evidently the man of whomI had heard. He appeared to be in a great hurry, shouted to the cabmanto wait, and brushed past the maid who opened the door with the air ofa man who was thoroughly at home.



“He was in the house about half an hour, and I could catch glimpses ofhim in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and down, talkingexcitedly, and waving his arms. Of her I could see nothing. Presentlyhe emerged, looking even more flurried than before. As he stepped upto the cab, he pulled a gold watch from his pocket and looked at itearnestly. ‘Drive like the devil,’ he shouted, ‘first to Gross &Hankey’s in Regent Street, and then to the church of St. Monica in theEdgware Road. Half a guinea if you do it in twenty minutes!’



“Away they went, and I was just wondering whether I should not dowell to follow them, when up the lane came a neat little landau, thecoachman with his coat only half-buttoned, and his tie under his ear,

while all the tags of his harness were sticking out of the buckles. Ithadn’t pulled up before she shot out of the hall door and into it. Ionly caught a glimpse of her at the moment, but she was a lovely woman,

with a face that a man might die for.



“‘The Church of St. Monica, John,’ she cried, ‘and half a sovereign ifyou reach it in twenty minutes.’



“This was quite too good to lose, Watson. I was just balancing whetherI should run for it, or whether I should perch behind her landau,

when a cab came through the street. The driver looked twice at such ashabby fare; but I jumped in before he could object. ‘The Church ofSt. Monica,’ said I, ‘and half a sovereign if you reach it in twentyminutes.’ It was twenty-five minutes to twelve, and of course it wasclear enough what was in the wind.



“My cabby drove fast. I don’t think I ever drove faster, but the otherswere there before us. The cab and the landau with their steaming horseswere in front of the door when I arrived. I paid the man and hurriedinto the church. There was not a soul there save the two whom I hadfollowed and a surpliced clergyman, who seemed to be expostulating withthem. They were all three standing in a knot in front of the altar. Ilounged up the side aisle like any other idler who has dropped into achurch. Suddenly, to my surprise, the three at the altar faced round tome, and Godfrey Norton came running as hard as he could towards me.”



“Thank God!” he cried. “You’ll do. Come! Come!”



“What then?” I asked.



“Come, man, come, only three minutes, or it won’t be legal.”





“I was half-dragged up to the altar, and, before I knew where I was, Ifound myself mumbling responses which were whispered in my ear, andvouching for things of which I knew nothing, and generally assistingin the secure tying up of Irene Adler, spinster, to Godfrey Norton,

bachelor. It was all done in an instant, and there was the gentlemanthanking me on the one side and the lady on the other, while theclergyman beamed on me in front. It was the most preposterous positionin which I ever found myself in my life, and it was the thought ofit that started me laughing just now. It seems that there had beensome informality about their license, that the clergyman absolutelyrefused to marry them without a witness of some sort, and that my luckyappearance saved the bridegroom from having to sally out into thestreets in search of a best man. The bride gave me a sovereign, and Imean to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the occasion.”



“This is a very unexpected turn of affairs,” said I; “and what then?”



“Well, I found my plans very seriously menaced. It looked as if thepair might take an immediate departure, and so necessitate very promptand energetic measures on my part. At the church door, however, theyseparated, he driving back to the Temple, and she to her own house. ‘Ishall drive out in the park at five as usual,’ she said, as she lefthim. I heard no more. They drove away in different directions, and Iwent off to make my own arrangements.”



“Which are?”



“Some cold beef and a glass of beer,” he answered, ringing the bell. “Ihave been too busy to think of food, and I am likely to be busier stillthis evening. By the way, doctor, I shall want your co-operation.”



“I shall be delighted.”



“You don’t mind breaking the law?”



“Not in the least.”



“Nor running a chance of arrest?”





“Not in a good cause.”



“Oh, the cause is excellent!”



“Then I am your man.”



“I was sure that I might rely on you.”



“But what is it you wish?”



“When Mrs. Turner has brought in the tray I will make it clear toyou. Now,” he said, as he turned hungrily on the simple fare that ourlandlady had provided, “I must discuss it while I eat, for I have notmuch time. It is nearly five now. In two hours we must be on the sceneof action. Miss Irene, or Madame, rather, returns from her drive atseven. We must be at Briony Lodge to meet her.”



“And what then?”



“You must leave that to me. I have already arranged what is to occur.

There is only one point on which I must insist. You must not interfere,

come what may. You understand?”



“I am to be neutral?”



“To do nothing whatever. There will probably be some smallunpleasantness. Do not join in it. It will end in my being conveyedinto the house. Four or five minutes afterwards the sitting-room windowwill open. You are to station yourself close to that open window.”



“Yes.”



“You are to watch me, for I will be visible to you.”



“Yes.”



“And when I raise my hand—so—you will throw into the room what I giveyou to throw, and will, at the same time, raise the cry of fire. Youquite follow me?”



“Entirely.”



“It is nothing very formidable,” he said, taking a long cigar-shapedroll from his pocket. “It is an ordinary plumber’s smoke-rocket,

fitted with a cap at either end to make it self-lighting. Your task isconfined to that. When you raise your cry of fire, it will be takenup by quite a number of people. You may then walk to the end of thestreet, and I will rejoin you in ten minutes. I hope that I have mademyself clear?”



“I am to remain neutral, to get near the window, to watch you, and, atthe signal, to throw in this object, then to raise the cry of fire, andto wait you at the corner of the street.”



“Precisely.”



“Then you may entirely rely on me.”



“That is excellent. I think, perhaps, it is almost time that I preparefor the new role I have to play.”



He disappeared into his bedroom, and returned in a few minutes in thecharacter of an amiable and simple-minded Nonconformist clergyman. Hisbroad black hat, his baggy trousers, his white tie, his sympatheticsmile, and general look of peering and benevolent curiosity were suchas Mr. John Hare alone could have equalled. It was not merely thatHolmes changed his costume. His expression, his manner, his very soulseemed to vary with every fresh part that he assumed. The stage lost afine actor, even as science lost an acute reasoner, when he became aspecialist in crime.



It was a quarter past six when we left Baker Street, and it stillwanted ten minutes to the hour when we found ourselves in SerpentineAvenue. It was already dusk, and the lamps were just being lighted aswe paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge, waiting for the comingof its occupant. The house was just such as I had pictured it fromSherlock Holmes’s succinct description, but the locality appeared tobe less private that I expected. On the contrary, for a small streetin a quiet neighborhood, it was remarkably animated. There was agroup of shabbily-dressed men smoking and laughing in a corner, ascissors-grinder with his wheel, two guardsmen who were flirting with anurse-girl, and several well-dressed young men who were lounging up anddown with cigars in their mouths.





“You see,” remarked Holmes, as we paced to and fro in front of thehouse, “this marriage rather simplifies matters. The photograph becomesa double-edged weapon now. The chances are that she would be as averseto its being seen by Mr. Godfrey Norton, as our client is to its comingto the eyes of his princess. Now the question is, Where are we to findthe photograph?”



“Where, indeed?”



“It is most unlikely that she carries it about with her. It is cabinetsize. Too large for easy concealment about a woman’s dress. She knowsthat the King is capable of having her waylaid and searched. Twoattempts of the sort have already been made. We may take it, then, thatshe does not carry it about with her.”



“Where, then?”



“Her banker or her lawyer. There is that double possibility. But I aminclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive, and theylike to do their own secreting. Why should she hand it over to any oneelse? She could trust her own guardianship, but she could not tellwhat indirect or political influence might be brought to bear upon abusiness man. Besides, remember that she had resolved to use it withina few days. It must be where she can lay her hands upon it. It must bein her own house.”



“But it has twice been burgled.”



“Pshaw! They did not know how to look.”



“But how will you look?”



“I will not look.”



“What then?”



“I will get her to show me.”



“But she will refuse.”



“She will not be able to. But I hear the rumble of wheels. It is hercarriage. Now carry out my orders to the letter.”



As he spoke the gleam of the side-lights of a carriage came round thecurve of the avenue. It was a smart little landau which rattled up tothe door of Briony Lodge. As it pulled up, one of the loafing men atthe corner dashed forward to open the door in the hope of earning acopper, but was elbowed away by another loafer, who had rushed up withthe same intention. A fierce quarrel broke out, which was increased bythe two guardsmen, who took sides with one of the loungers, and by thescissors-grinder, who was equally hot upon the other side. A blow wasstruck, and in an instant the lady, who had stepped from her carriage,

was the centre of a little knot of flushed and struggling men, whostruck savagely at each other with their fists and sticks. Holmesdashed into the crowd to protect the lady; but just as he reached herhe gave a cry and dropped to the ground, with the blood running freelydown his face. At his fall the guardsmen took to their heels in onedirection and the loungers in the other, while a number of betterdressed people, who had watched the scuffle without taking part in it,

crowded in to help the lady and to attend to the injured man. IreneAdler, as I will still call her, had hurried up the steps; but shestood at the top with her superb figure outlined against the lights ofthe hall, looking back into the street.



“Is the poor gentleman much hurt?” she asked.



“He is dead,” cried several voices.



“No, no, there’s life in him!” shouted another. “But he’ll be gonebefore you can get him to hospital.”



“He’s a brave fellow,” said a woman. “They would have had the lady’spurse and watch if it hadn’t been for him. They were a gang, and arough one, too. Ah, he’s breathing now.”



“He can’t lie in the street. May we bring him in, marm?”



“Surely. Bring him into the sitting-room. There is a comfortable sofa.

This way, please!”



Slowly and solemnly he was borne into Briony Lodge and laid out in theprincipal room, while I still observed the proceedings from my postby the window. The lamps had been lit, but the blinds had not beendrawn, so that I could see Holmes as he lay upon the couch. I do notknow whether he was seized with compunction at that moment for the parthe was playing, but I know that I never felt more heartily ashamed ofmyself in my life than when I saw the beautiful creature against whomI was conspiring, or the grace and kindliness with which she waitedupon the injured man. And yet it would be the blackest treachery toHolmes to draw back now from the part which he had intrusted to me.

I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under my ulster.

After all, I thought, we are not injuring her. We are but preventingher from injuring another.



Holmes had sat up upon the couch, and I saw him motion like a man whois in need of air. A maid rushed across and threw open the window. Atthe same instant I saw him raise his hand, and at the signal I tossedmy rocket into the room with a cry of “Fire!” The word was no soonerout of my mouth than the whole crowd of spectators, well dressed andill—gentlemen, ostlers, and servant-maids—joined in a general shriekof “Fire!” Thick clouds of smoke curled through the room and out atthe open window. I caught a glimpse of rushing figures, and a momentlater the voice of Holmes from within assuring them that it was a falsealarm. Slipping through the shouting crowd I made my way to the cornerof the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my friend’s armin mine, and to get away from the scene of uproar. He walked swiftlyand in silence for some few minutes, until we had turned down one ofthe quiet streets which lead towards the Edgware Road.



“You did it very nicely, doctor,” he remarked. “Nothing could have beenbetter. It is all right.”



“You have the photograph?”



“I know where it is.”



“And how did you find out?”



“She showed me, as I told you that she would.”



“I am still in the dark.”



“I do not wish to make a mystery,” said he, laughing. “The matter wasperfectly simple. You, of course, saw that every one in the street wasan accomplice. They were all engaged for the evening.”



“I guessed as much.”





“Then, when the row broke out, I had a little moist red paint in thepalm of my hand. I rushed forward, fell down, clapped my hand to myface, and became a piteous spectacle. It is an old trick.”



“That also I could fathom.”



“Then they carried me in. She was bound to have me in. What else couldshe do? And into her sitting-room, which was the very room which Isuspected. It lay between that and her bedroom, and I was determinedto see which. They laid me on a couch, I motioned for air, they werecompelled to open the window, and you had your chance.”



“How did that help you?”



“It was all-important. When a woman thinks that her house is on fire,

her instinct is at once to rush to the thing which she values most. Itis a perfectly overpowering impulse, and I have more than once takenadvantage of it. In the case of the Darlington Substitution Scandal itwas of use to me, and also in the Arnsworth Castle business. A marriedwoman grabs at her baby; an unmarried one reaches for her jewel-box.

Now it was clear to me that our lady of to-day had nothing in the housemore precious to her than what we are in quest of. She would rush tosecure it. The alarm of fire was admirably done. The smoke and shoutingwere enough to shake nerves of steel. She responded beautifully. Thephotograph is in a recess behind a sliding panel just above the rightbell-pull. She was there in an instant, and I caught a glimpse of it asshe half-drew it out. When I cried out that it was a false alarm, shereplaced it, glanced at the rocket, rushed from the room, and I havenot seen her since. I rose, and, making my excuses, escaped from thehouse. I hesitated whether to attempt to secure the photograph at once;but the coachman had come in, and as he was watching me narrowly, itseemed safer to wait. A little over-precipitance may ruin all.”



“And now?” I asked.



“Our quest is practically finished. I shall call with the Kingto-morrow, and with you, if you care to come with us. We will be showninto the sitting-room to wait for the lady, but it is probable thatwhen she comes she may find neither us nor the photograph. It might bea satisfaction to His Majesty to regain it with his own hands.”



“And when will you call?”



“At eight in the morning. She will not be up, so that we shall have aclear field. Besides, we must be prompt, for this marriage may mean acomplete change in her life and habits. I must wire to the King withoutdelay.”



We had reached Baker Street, and had stopped at the door. He wassearching his pockets for the key, when some one passing said:



“Good-night, Mister Sherlock Holmes.”



There were several people on the pavement at the time, but the greetingappeared to come from a slim youth in an ulster who had hurried by.



“I’ve heard that voice before,” said Holmes, staring down the dimly-litstreet. “Now, I wonder who the deuce that could have been.”



IIII slept at Baker Street that night, and we were engaged upon our toastand coffee in the morning when the King of Bohemia rushed into the room.



“You have really got it!” he cried, grasping Sherlock Holmes by eithershoulder, and looking eagerly into his face.



“Not yet.”



“But you have hopes?”



“I have hopes.”



“Then, come. I am all impatience to be gone.”



“We must have a cab.”



“No, my brougham is waiting.”



“Then that will simplify matters.” We descended, and started off oncemore for Briony Lodge.





“Irene Adler is married,” remarked Holmes.



“Married! When?”



“Yesterday.”



“But to whom?”



“To an English lawyer named Norton.”



“But she could not love him?”



“I am in hopes that she does.”



“And why in hopes?”



“Because it would spare your Majesty all fear of future annoyance. Ifthe lady loves her husband, she does not love your Majesty. If she doesnot love your Majesty, there is no reason why she should interfere withyour Majesty’s plan.”



“It is true. And yet—Well! I wish she had been of my own station! Whata queen she would have made!” He relapsed into a moody silence, whichwas not broken until we drew up in Serpentine Avenue.



The door of Briony Lodge was open, and an elderly woman stood uponthe steps. She watched us with a sardonic eye as we stepped from thebrougham.



“Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I believe?” said she.



“I am Mr. Holmes,” answered my companion, looking at her with aquestioning and rather startled gaze.



“Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She leftthis morning with her husband by the 5.15 train from Charing Cross forthe Continent.”



“What!” Sherlock Holmes staggered back, white with chagrin andsurprise. “Do you mean that she has left England?”



“Never to return.”



“And the papers?” asked the King, hoarsely. “All is lost.”



“We shall see.” He pushed past the servant and rushed into thedrawing-room, followed by the King and myself. The furniture wasscattered about in every direction, with dismantled shelves and opendrawers, as if the lady had hurriedly ransacked them before her flight.

Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small sliding shutter,

and, plunging in his hand, pulled out a photograph and a letter. Thephotograph was of Irene Adler herself in evening dress, the letter wassuperscribed to “Sherlock Holmes, Esq. To be left till called for.” Myfriend tore it open, and we all three read it together. It was dated atmidnight of the preceding night, and ran in this way:



“My Dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,—You really did it verywell. You took me in completely. Until after the alarm offire, I had not a suspicion. But then, when I found how I hadbetrayed myself, I began to think. I had been warned againstyou months ago. I had been told that, if the King employed anagent, it would certainly be you. And your address had beengiven me. Yet, with all this, you made me reveal what youwanted to know. Even after I became suspicious, I found it hardto think evil of such a dear, kind old clergyman. But, youknow, I have been trained as an actress myself. Male costumeis nothing new to me. I often take advantage of the freedomwhich it gives. I sent John, the coachman, to watch you, ranup-stairs, got into my walking-clothes, as I call them, andcame down just as you departed.



“Well, I followed you to your door, and so made sure that I wasreally an object of interest to the celebrated Mr. SherlockHolmes. Then I, rather imprudently, wished you good-night, andstarted for the Temple to see my husband.



“We both thought the best resource was flight, when pursued byso formidable an antagonist; so you will find the nest emptywhen you call to-morrow. As to the photograph, your client mayrest in peace. I love and am loved by a better man than he.

The King may do what he will without hinderance from one whomhe has cruelly wronged. I keep it only to safeguard myself,

and to preserve a weapon which will always secure me from anysteps which he might take in the future. I leave a photographwhich he might care to possess; and I remain, dear Mr. SherlockHolmes, very truly yours,



Irene Norton, née Adler.”













“What a woman—oh, what a woman!” cried the King of Bohemia, when wehad all three read this epistle. “Did I not tell you how quick andresolute she was? Would she not have made an admirable queen? Is it nota pity that she was not on my level?”



“From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a verydifferent level to your Majesty,” said Holmes, coldly. “I am sorrythat I have not been able to bring your Majesty’s business to a moresuccessful conclusion.”



“On the contrary, my dear sir,” cried the King; “nothing could be moresuccessful. I know that her word is inviolate. The photograph is now assafe as if it were in the fire.”



“I am glad to hear your Majesty say so.”



“I am immensely indebted to you. Pray tell me in what way I can rewardyou. This ring—” He slipped an emerald snake ring from his finger andheld it out upon the palm of his hand.



“Your Majesty has something which I should value even more highly,”said Holmes.



“You have but to name it.”



“This photograph!”



The King stared at him in amazement.



“Irene’s photograph!” he cried. “Certainly, if you wish it.”



“I thank your Majesty. Then there is no more to be done in the matter.

I have the honor to wish you a very good-morning.” He bowed, and,

turning away without observing the hand which the King had stretchedout to him, he set off in my company for his chambers.







And that was how a great scandal threatened to affect the kingdom ofBohemia, and how the best plans of Mr. Sherlock Holmes were beaten bya woman’s wit. He used to make merry over the cleverness of women, butI have not heard him do it of late. And when he speaks of Irene Adler,

or when he refers to her photograph, it is always under the honorabletitle of the woman.







Adventure II

THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE











I HAD called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, one day in the autumnof last year, and found him in deep conversation with a very stout,

florid-faced, elderly gentleman, with fiery red hair. With an apologyfor my intrusion, I was about to withdraw, when Holmes pulled meabruptly into the room and closed the door behind me.



“You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson,” hesaid, cordially.



“I was afraid that you were engaged.”



“So I am. Very much so.”



“Then I can wait in the next room.”



“Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helperin many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he willbe of the utmost use to me in yours also.”



The stout gentleman half-rose from his chair and gave a bob ofgreeting, with a quick, little, questioning glance from his small,

fat-encircled eyes.



“Try the settee,” said Holmes, relapsing into his arm-chair and puttinghis finger-tips together, as was his custom when in judicial moods. “Iknow, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre andoutside the conventions and humdrum routine of every-day life. You haveshown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you tochronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellishso many of my own little adventures.”









“Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me,” Iobserved.



“You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we wentinto the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, thatfor strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go tolife itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of theimagination.”



“A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting.”



“You did, doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view,

for otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you, until yourreason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr.

Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning,

and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singularwhich I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark thatthe strangest and most unique things are very often connected not withthe larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, wherethere is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed.

As far as I have heard it is impossible for me to say whether thepresent case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of eventsis certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to.

Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommenceyour narrative. I ask you, not merely because my friend Dr. Watson hasnot heard the opening part, but also because the peculiar nature of thestory makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your lips.

As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course ofevents, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similarcases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced toadmit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique.”



The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of somelittle pride, and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the insidepocket of his great-coat. As he glanced down the advertisement column,

with his head thrust forward, and the paper flattened out upon hisknee, I took a good look at the man, and endeavored, after the fashionof my companion, to read the indications which might be presented byhis dress or appearance.



I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor boreevery mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese,

pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy gray shepherd’s check trousers,

a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drabwaistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit ofmetal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brownovercoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him.

Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the mansave his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin anddiscontent upon his features.



Sherlock Holmes’s quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook hishead with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances. “Beyond theobvious facts that he has at some time done manual labor, that he takessnuff, that he is a Freemason, that he has been in China, and that hehas done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce nothingelse.”



Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon thepaper, but his eyes upon my companion.



“How, in the name of good-fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?”he asked. “How did you know, for example, that I did manual labor. It’sas true as gospel, for I began as a ship’s carpenter.”



“Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger thanyour left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more developed.”



“Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?”



“I won’t insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,

especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you usean arc-and-compass breastpin.”



“Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?”





“What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for fiveinches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where yourest it upon the desk.”



“Well, but China?”



“The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wristcould only have been done in China. I have made a small study of tattoomarks, and have even contributed to the literature of the subject.

That trick of staining the fishes’ scales of a delicate pink is quitepeculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging fromyour watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple.”



Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. “Well, I never!” said he. “I thoughtat first that you had done something clever, but I see that there wasnothing in it, after all.”



“I begin to think, Watson,” said Holmes, “that I make a mistake inexplaining. ‘Omne ignotum pro magnifico,’ you know, and my poor littlereputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so candid. Canyou not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?”



“Yes, I have got it now,” he answered, with his thick, red fingerplanted half-way down the column. “Here it is. This is what began itall. You just read it for yourself, sir.”



I took the paper from him, and read as follows:



“To the Red-headed League: On account of the bequest of thelate Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pa., U.S.A., there is nowanother vacancy open which entitles a member of the Leagueto a salary of £4 a week for purely nominal services. Allred-headed men who are sound in body and mind, and abovethe age of twenty-one years, are eligible. Apply in person onMonday, at eleven o’clock, to Duncan Ross, at the offices ofthe League, 7 Pope’s Court, Fleet Street.”











“What on earth does this mean?” I ejaculated, after I had twice readover the extraordinary announcement.



Holmes chuckled, and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when inhigh spirits. “It is a little off the beaten track, isn’t it?” saidhe. “And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch, and tell us all aboutyourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement hadupon your fortunes. You will first make a note, doctor, of the paperand the date.”



“It is The Morning Chronicle, of April 27, 1890. Just two months ago.”



“Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?”



“Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,”said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; “I have a small pawnbroker’sbusiness at Coburg Square, near the city. It’s not a very large affair,

and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. Iused to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and Iwould have a job to pay him, but that he is willing to come for halfwages, so as to learn the business.”



“What is the name of this obliging youth?” asked Sherlock Holmes.



“His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he’s not such a youth, either. It’shard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes;and I know very well that he could better himself, and earn twice whatI am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should Iput ideas in his head?”



“Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an employé whocomes under the full market price. It is not a common experience amongemployers in this age. I don’t know that your assistant is not asremarkable as your advertisement.”



“Oh, he has his faults, too,” said Mr. Wilson. “Never was such a fellowfor photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to beimproving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbitinto its hole to develope his pictures. That is his main fault; but, onthe whole, he’s a good worker. There’s no vice in him.”



“He is still with you, I presume?”





“Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple cooking,

and keeps the place clean—that’s all I have in the house, for I am awidower, and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the threeof us; and we keep a roof over our heads, and pay our debts, if we donothing more.



“The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, hecame down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this verypaper in his hand, and he says:



“‘I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.’



“‘Why that?’ I asks.



“‘Why,’ says he, ‘here’s another vacancy on the League of theRed-headed Men. It’s worth quite a little fortune to any man who getsit, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there are men,

so that the trustees are at their wits’ end what to do with the money.

If my hair would only change color, here’s a nice little crib all readyfor me to step into.’



“‘Why, what is it, then?’ I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a verystay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my havingto go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over thedoor-mat. In that way I didn’t know much of what was going on outside,

and I was always glad of a bit of news.



“‘Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?’ he asked,

with his eyes open.



“‘Never.’



“‘Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of thevacancies.’



“‘And what are they worth?’ I asked.



“‘Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, and itneed not interfere very much with one’s other occupations.’



“Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for thebusiness has not been over-good for some years, and an extra couple ofhundred would have been very handy.



“‘Tell me all about it,’ said I.





“‘Well,’ said he, showing me the advertisement, ‘you can see foryourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the addresswhere you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, theLeague was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, whowas very peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had agreat sympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was foundthat he had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, withinstructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths tomen whose hair is of that color. From all I hear it is splendid pay,

and very little to do.’



“‘But,’ said I, ‘there would be millions of red-headed men who wouldapply.’



“‘Not so many as you might think,’ he answered. ‘You see it is reallyconfined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started fromLondon when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn.

Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying if your hair islight red, or dark red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fieryred. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in;but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put yourself out ofthe way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.’



“Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that myhair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that, ifthere was to be any competition in the matter, I stood as good a chanceas any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know somuch about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I just orderedhim to put up the shutters for the day, and to come right away with me.

He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up, andstarted off for the address that was given us in the advertisement.



“I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. Fromnorth, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in hishair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. FleetStreet was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope’s Court lookedlike a coster’s orange barrow. I should not have thought there wereso many in the whole country as were brought together by that singleadvertisement. Every shade of color they were—straw, lemon, orange,

brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there werenot many who had the real vivid flame-colored tint. When I saw how manywere waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding wouldnot hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed andpulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up tothe steps which led to the office. There was a double stream upon thestair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but wewedged in as well as we could, and soon found ourselves in the office.”



“Your experience has been a most entertaining one,” remarked Holmes, ashis client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff.

“Pray continue your very interesting statement.”



“There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and adeal table, behind which sat a small man, with a head that was evenredder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he cameup, and then he always managed to find some fault in them which woulddisqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very easymatter, after all. However, when our turn came, the little man was muchmore favorable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the dooras we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.



“‘This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,’ said my assistant, ‘and he is willing tofill a vacancy in the League.’



“‘And he is admirably suited for it,’ the other answered. ‘He has everyrequirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.’ Hetook a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hairuntil I felt quite bashful. Then suddenly he plunged forward, wrung myhand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.





“‘It would be injustice to hesitate,’ said he. ‘You will, however, I amsure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.’ With that he seizedmy hair in both his hands, and tugged until I yelled with the pain.

‘There is water in your eyes,’ said he, as he released me. ‘I perceivethat all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we havetwice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you talesof cobbler’s wax which would disgust you with human nature.’ He steppedover to the window, and shouted through it at the top of his voice thatthe vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below,

and the folk all trooped away in different directions, until there wasnot a red head to be seen except my own and that of the manager.



“‘My name,’ said he, ‘is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of thepensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you amarried man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?’



“I answered that I had not.



“His face fell immediately.



“‘Dear me!’ he said, gravely, ‘that is very serious indeed! I am sorryto hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagationand spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It isexceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.’



“My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was notto have the vacancy after all; but, after thinking it over for a fewminutes, he said that it would be all right.



“‘In the case of another,’ said he, ‘the objection might be fatal, butwe must stretch a point in favor of a man with such a head of hair asyours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?’



“‘Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,’ said I.



“‘Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!’ said Vincent Spaulding. ‘Ishall be able to look after that for you.’









“‘What would be the hours?’ I asked.



“‘Ten to two.’



“Now a pawnbroker’s business is mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes,

especially Thursday and Friday evening, which is just before pay-day;so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the mornings.

Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would seeto anything that turned up.



“‘That would suit me very well,’ said I. ‘And the pay?’



“‘Is £4 a week.’



“‘And the work?’



“‘Is purely nominal.’



“‘What do you call purely nominal?’



“‘Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building, thewhole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever.

The will is very clear upon that point. You don’t comply with theconditions if you budge from the office during that time.’



“‘It’s only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,’ saidI.



“‘No excuse will avail,’ said Mr. Duncan Ross, ‘neither sickness norbusiness nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose yourbillet.’



“‘And the work?’



“‘Is to copy out the “Encyclopædia Britannica.” There is the firstvolume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, andblotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be readyto-morrow?’



“‘Certainly,’ I answered.



“‘Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you oncemore on the important position which you have been fortunate enough togain.’ He bowed me out of the room, and I went home with my assistant,

hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own goodfortune.



“Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was inlow spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the wholeaffair must be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object mightbe I could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that any onecould make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doinganything so simple as copying out the ‘Encyclopædia Britannica.’Vincent Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bedtime Ihad reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morningI determined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottleof ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, Istarted off for Pope’s Court.



“Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as possible.

The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there tosee that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the letter A, andthen he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that allwas right with me. At two o’clock he bade me good-day, complimented meupon the amount that I had written, and locked the door of the officeafter me.



“This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the managercame in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my week’s work.

It was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morningI was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr.

Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, aftera time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared toleave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come,

and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I wouldnot risk the loss of it.



“Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots andArchery and Armor and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligencethat I might get on to the B’s before very long. It cost me somethingin foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings.

And then suddenly the whole business came to an end.”





“To an end?”



“Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usualat ten o’clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little squareof card-board hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Hereit is, and you can read for yourself.”



He held up a piece of white card-board about the size of a sheet ofnote-paper. It read in this fashion:



“THE RED-HEADED LEAGUEISDISSOLVED.



October 9, 1890.”







Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the ruefulface behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completelyovertopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roarof laughter.



“I cannot see that there is anything very funny,” cried our client,

flushing up to the roots of his flaming head. “If you can do nothingbetter than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere.”



“No, no,” cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which hehad half risen. “I really wouldn’t miss your case for the world. It ismost refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my sayingso, something just a little funny about it. Pray what steps did youtake when you found the card upon the door?”



“I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called atthe offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it.

Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on theground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become ofthe Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any suchbody. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that thename was new to him.







“THE DOOR WAS SHUT AND LOCKED”















“‘Well,’ said I, ‘the gentleman at No. 4.’



“‘What, the red-headed man?’



“‘Yes.’



“‘Oh,’ said he, ‘his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor, andwas using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premiseswere ready. He moved out yesterday.’



“‘Where could I find him?’



“‘Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 KingEdward Street, near St. Paul’s.’



“I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was amanufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard ofeither Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross.”



“And what did you do then?” asked Holmes.



“I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of myassistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say thatif I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough,

Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a place without a struggle, so,

as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice to poor folkwho were in need of it, I came right away to you.”



“And you did very wisely,” said Holmes. “Your case is an exceedinglyremarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what youhave told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang fromit than might at first sight appear.”



“Grave enough!” said Mr. Jabez Wilson. “Why, I have lost four pound aweek.”



“As far as you are personally concerned,” remarked Holmes, “I do notsee that you have any grievance against this extraordinary league. Onthe contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some £30, to saynothing of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subjectwhich comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them.”



“No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and whattheir object was in playing this prank—if it was a prank—upon me. Itwas a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirtypounds.”



“We shall endeavor to clear up these points for you. And, first, oneor two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first calledyour attention to the advertisement—how long had he been with you?”



“About a month then.”



“How did he come?”



“In answer to an advertisement.”



“Was he the only applicant?”



“No, I had a dozen.”



“Why did you pick him?”



“Because he was handy, and would come cheap.”



“At half-wages, in fact.”



“Yes.”



“What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?”



“Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,

though he’s not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon hisforehead.”



Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. “I thought asmuch,” said he. “Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced forearrings?”



“Yes, sir. He told me that a gypsy had done it for him when he was alad.”



“Hum!” said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. “He is still withyou?”



“Oh yes, sir; I have only just left him.”



“And has your business been attended to in your absence?”



“Nothing to complain of, sir. There’s never very much to do of amorning.”



“That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion uponthe subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and Ihope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion.”



“Well, Watson,” said Holmes, when our visitor had left us, “what do youmake of it all?”





“I make nothing of it,” I answered, frankly. “It is a most mysteriousbusiness.”



“As a rule,” said Holmes, “the more bizarre a thing is the lessmysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimeswhich are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the mostdifficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter.”



“What are you going to do, then?” I asked.



“To smoke,” he answered. “It is quite a three-pipe problem, and I begthat you won’t speak to me for fifty minutes.” He curled himself upin his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, andthere he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting outlike the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion thathe had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenlysprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up hismind, and put his pipe down upon the mantel-piece.



“Sarasate plays at the St. James’s Hall this afternoon,” he remarked.

“What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for a fewhours?”



“I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing.”



“Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the city first, andwe can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good dealof German music on the programme, which is rather more to my taste thanItalian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Comealong!”



We travelled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walktook us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which wehad listened to in the morning. It was a pokey, little, shabby-genteelplace, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick houses looked outinto a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass anda few clumps of faded laurel-bushes made a hard fight against asmoke-laden and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brownboard with “Jabez Wilson” in white letters, upon a cornerhouse, announced the place where our red-headed client carried on hisbusiness. Sherlock Holmes stopped in front of it with his head on oneside, and looked it all over, with his eyes shining brightly betweenpuckered lids. Then he walked slowly up the street, and then down againto the corner, still looking keenly at the houses. Finally he returnedto the pawnbroker’s, and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavementwith his stick two or three times, he went up to the door and knocked.

It was instantly opened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow,

who asked him to step in.



“Thank you,” said Holmes, “I only wished to ask you how you would gofrom here to the Strand.”



“Third right, fourth left,” answered the assistant, promptly, closingthe door.



“Smart fellow, that,” observed Holmes, as we walked away. “He is, in myjudgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring I am notsure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of himbefore.”



“Evidently,” said I, “Mr. Wilson’s assistant counts for a good deal inthis mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired yourway merely in order that you might see him.”



“Not him.”



“What then?”



“The knees of his trousers.”



“And what did you see?”



“What I expected to see.”



“Why did you beat the pavement?”



“My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We arespies in an enemy’s country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.

Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it.”



The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the cornerfrom the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast toit as the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the mainarteries which convey the traffic of the city to the north and west.

The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowingin a double tide inward and outward, while the foot-paths were blackwith the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realizeas we looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premisesthat they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnantsquare which we had just quitted.



“Let me see,” said Holmes, standing at the corner, and glancing alongthe line, “I should like just to remember the order of the houses here.

It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There isMortimer’s, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburgbranch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, andMcFarlane’s carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to theother block. And now, doctor, we’ve done our work, so it’s time we hadsome play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land,

where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are nored-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums.”



My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only avery capable performer, but a composer of no ordinary merit. All theafternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness,

gently waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while hisgently smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike thoseof Holmes, the sleuth-hound, Holmes the relentless, keen-witted,

ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In hissingular character the dual nature alternately asserted itself, andhis extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have oftenthought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood whichoccasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him fromextreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was neverso truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging inhis arm-chair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions.

Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him,

and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to the level ofintuition, until those who were unacquainted with his methods wouldlook askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of othermortals. When I saw him that afternoon so

enrapt in the music at St.

James’s Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whomhe had set himself to hunt down.



“You want to go home, no doubt, doctor,” he remarked, as we emerged.



“Yes, it would be as well.”



“And I have some business to do which will take some hours. Thisbusiness at Coburg Square is serious.”



“Why serious?”



“A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason tobelieve that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturdayrather complicates matters. I shall want your help to-night.”



“At what time?”



“Ten will be early enough.”



“I shall be at Baker Street at ten.”



“Very well. And, I say, doctor, there may be some little danger, sokindly put your army revolver in your pocket.” He waved his hand,

turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.











“ALL AFTERNOON HE SAT IN THE STALLS”













I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbors, but I was alwaysoppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with SherlockHolmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he hadseen, and yet from his words it was evident that he saw clearly notonly what had happened, but what was about to happen, while to me thewhole business was still confused and grotesque. As I drove home tomy house in Kensington I thought over it all, from the extraordinarystory of the red-headed copier of the “Encyclopædia” down to the visitto Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with which he had partedfrom me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go armed?

Where were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmesthat this smooth-faced pawnbroker’s assistant was a formidable man—aman who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave itup in despair, and set the matter aside until night should bring anexplanation.



It was a quarter past nine when I started from home and made my wayacross the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Twohansoms were standing at the door, and, as I entered the passage, Iheard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room I foundHolmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognizedas Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long,

thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectablefrock-coat.



“Ha! our party is complete,” said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket,

and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. “Watson, I thinkyou know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr.

Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night’s adventure.”



“We’re hunting in couples again, doctor, you see,” said Jones, in hisconsequential way. “Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting achase. All he wants is an old dog to help him to do the running down.”



“I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,”observed Mr. Merryweather, gloomily.



“You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir,” said thepolice agent, loftily. “He has his own little methods, which are, if hewon’t mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fantastic,

but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much tosay that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder andthe Agra treasure, he has been more nearly correct than the officialforce.”



“Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right,” said the stranger,

with deference. “Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is thefirst Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had myrubber.”



“I think you will find,” said Sherlock Holmes, “that you will play fora higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the playwill be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will besome £30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wishto lay your hands.”



“John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He’s a young man,

Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I wouldrather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He’s aremarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke,

and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning ashis fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we neverknow where to find the man himself. He’ll crack a crib in Scotland oneweek, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.

I’ve been on his track for years, and have never set eyes on him yet.”



“I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I’vehad one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree withyou that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however,

and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom,

Watson and I will follow in the second.”



Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive,

and lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in theafternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streetsuntil we emerged into Farringdon Street.



“We are close there now,” my friend remarked. “This fellow Merryweatheris a bank director, and personally interested in the matter. I thoughtit as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, thoughan absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one positive virtue. Heis as brave as a bull-dog, and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets hisclaws upon any one. Here we are, and they are waiting for us.”



We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had foundourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, followingthe guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passageand through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was asmall corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also wasopened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminatedat another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light alantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, andso, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which waspiled all round with crates and massive boxes.



“You are not very vulnerable from above,” Holmes remarked, as he heldup the lantern and gazed about him.



“Nor from below,” said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon theflags which lined the floor. “Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!” heremarked, looking up in surprise.



“I must really ask you to be a little more quiet,” said Holmes,

severely. “You have already imperilled the whole success of ourexpedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit downupon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?”



The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a veryinjured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his kneesupon the floor, and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began toexamine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficedto satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again, and put his glass inhis pocket.



“We have at least an hour before us,” he remarked; “for they canhardly take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed.

Then they will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their workthe longer time they will have for their escape. We are at present,

doctor—as no doubt you have divined—in the cellar of the city branchof one of the principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairmanof directors, and he will explain to you that there are reasons why themore daring criminals of London should take a considerable interest inthis cellar at present.”



“It is our French gold,” whispered the director. “We have had severalwarnings that an attempt might be made upon it.”



“Your French gold?”



“Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources, andborrowed, for that purpose, 30,000 napoleons from the Bank of France.

It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack themoney, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon whichI sit contains 2000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil. Ourreserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept in asingle branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon thesubject.”



“Which were very well justified,” observed Holmes. “And now it is timethat we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour matterswill come to a head. In the mean time, Mr. Merryweather, we must putthe screen over that dark lantern.”



“And sit in the dark?”



“I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and Ithought that, as we were a partie carrée, you might have your rubberafter all. But I see that the enemy’s preparations have gone so farthat we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we mustchoose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall takethem at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are careful.

I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves behindthose. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly. If theyfire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down.”



I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behindwhich I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of hislantern, and left us in pitch darkness—such an absolute darknessas I have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remainedto assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out ata moment’s notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch ofexpectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the suddengloom, and in the cold, dank air of the vault.



“They have but one retreat,” whispered Holmes. “That is back throughthe house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what Iasked you, Jones?”



“I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door.”



“Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent andwait.”



What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but anhour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must havealmost gone, and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary andstiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves were workedup to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute that Icould not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I coulddistinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from thethin, sighing note of the bank director. From my position I could lookover the case in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caughtthe glint of a light.



At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then itlengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without anywarning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared; a white,

almost womanly hand, which felt about in the centre of the little areaof light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers,

protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as itappeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark whichmarked a chink between the stones.



Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearingsound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side, andleft a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light of alantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, whichlooked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of theaperture, drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until one kneerested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side of thehole, and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small likehimself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.



“It’s all clear,” he whispered. “Have you the chisel and the bags.

Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I’ll swing for it!”



Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar.

The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending clothas Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed upon the barrel of arevolver, but Holmes’s hunting crop came down on the man’s wrist, andthe pistol clinked upon the stone floor.



“It’s no use, John Clay,” said Holmes, blandly. “You have no chance atall.”



“So I see,” the other answered, with the utmost coolness. “I fancy thatmy pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails.”



“There are three men waiting for him at the door,” said Holmes.



“Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I mustcompliment you.”



“And I you,” Holmes answered. “Your red-headed idea was very new andeffective.”



“You’ll see your pal again presently,” said Jones. “He’s quicker atclimbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies.”





“I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands,” remarkedour prisoner, as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. “You may notbe aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also,

when you address me always to say ‘sir’ and ‘please.’”



“All right,” said Jones, with a stare and a snigger. “Well, would youplease, sir, march up-stairs, where we can get a cab to carry yourhighness to the police-station?”



“That is better,” said John Clay, serenely. He made a sweeping bow tothe three of us, and walked quietly off in the custody of the detective.



“Really Mr. Holmes,” said Mr. Merryweather, as we followed them fromthe cellar, “I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.

There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the mostcomplete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robberythat have ever come within my experience.”



“I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr.

John Clay,” said Holmes. “I have been at some small expense over thismatter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I amamply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique,

and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League.”







“You see, Watson,” he explained, in the early hours of the morning,

as we sat over a glass of whiskey-and-soda in Baker Street, “it wasperfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object of thisrather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and thecopying of the ‘Encyclopædia,’ must be to get this not over-brightpawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours every day. It was acurious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult tosuggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to Clay’s ingeniousmind by the color of his accomplice’s hair. The £4 a week was a lurewhich must draw him, and what was it to them, who were playing forthousands? They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporaryoffice, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and togetherthey manage to secure his absence every morning in the week. Fromthe time that I heard of the assistant having come for half wages,

it was obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing thesituation.”



“But how could you guess what the motive was?”



“Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a merevulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man’sbusiness was a small one, and there was nothing in his house whichcould account for such elaborate preparations, and such an expenditureas they were at. It must, then, be something out of the house. Whatcould it be? I thought of the assistant’s fondness for photography,

and his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar! There was theend of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysteriousassistant, and found that I had to deal with one of the coolestand most daring criminals in London. He was doing something in thecellar—something which took many hours a day for months on end. Whatcould it be, once more? I could think of nothing save that he wasrunning a tunnel to some other building.



“So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. Isurprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I wasascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind.

It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, theassistant answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had neverset eyes upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. Hisknees were what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked howworn, wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours ofburrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. Iwalked round the corner, saw that the City and Suburban Bank abutted onour friend’s premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When youdrove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard, and upon thechairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen.”



“And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night?” Iasked.



“Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that theycared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson’s presence—in other words,

that they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that theyshould use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion mightbe removed. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as itwould give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons Iexpected them to come to-night.”



“You reasoned it out beautifully,” I exclaimed, in unfeignedadmiration. “It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true.”



“It saved me from ennui,” he answered, yawning. “Alas! I already feelit closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escapefrom the commonplaces of existence. These little problems help me to doso.”



“And you are a benefactor of the race,” said I.



He shrugged his shoulders. “Well, perhaps, after all, it is of somelittle use,” he remarked. “‘L’homme c’est rien—l’oeuvre c’esttout,’ as Gustave Flaubert wrote to Georges Sand.”







Adventure IIIA CASE OF IDENTITY











“MY dear fellow,” said Sherlock Holmes, as we sat on either side ofthe fire in his lodgings at Baker Street, “life is infinitely strangerthan anything which the mind of man could invent. We would not dare toconceive the things which are really mere commonplaces of existence.

If we could fly out of that window hand in hand, hover over this greatcity, gently remove the roofs, and peep in at the queer things whichare going on, the strange coincidences, the plannings, the cross-purposes,

the wonderful chains of events, working through generations,

and leading to the most outré results, it would make all fictionwith its conventionalities and foreseen conclusions most stale andunprofitable.”



“And yet I am not convinced of it,” I answered. “The cases which cometo light in the papers are, as a rule, bald enough, and vulgar enough.

We have in our police reports realism pushed to its extreme limits,

and yet the result is, it must be confessed, neither fascinating norartistic.”











“A certain selection and discretion must be used in producing arealistic effect,” remarked Holmes. “This is wanting in the policereport, where more stress is laid, perhaps, upon the platitudes of themagistrate than upon the details, which to an observer contain thevital essence of the whole matter. Depend upon it there is nothing sounnatural as the commonplace.”







I smiled and shook my head. “I can quite understand you thinking so,”I said. “Of course, in your position of unofficial adviser and helperto everybody who is absolutely puzzled, throughout three continents,

you are brought in contact with all that is strange and bizarre. Buthere”—I picked up the morning paper from the ground—“let us put itto a practical test. Here is the first heading upon which I come. ‘Ahusband’s cruelty to his wife.’ There is half a column of print, butI know without reading it that it is all perfectly familiar to me.

There is, of course, the other woman, the drink, the push, the blow,

the bruise, the sympathetic sister or landlady. The crudest of writerscould invent nothing more crude.”



“Indeed, your example is an unfortunate one for your argument,”said Holmes, taking the paper and glancing his eye down it. “Thisis the Dundas separation case, and, as it happens, I was engaged inclearing up some small points in connection with it. The husband wasa teetotaler, there was no other woman, and the conduct complained ofwas that he had drifted into the habit of winding up every meal bytaking out his false teeth and hurling them at his wife, which, youwill allow, is not an action likely to occur to the imagination of theaverage story-teller. Take a pinch of snuff, doctor, and acknowledgethat I have scored over you in your example.”



He held out his snuffbox of old gold, with a great amethyst in thecentre of the lid. Its splendor was in such contrast to his homely waysand simple life that I could not help commenting upon it.



“Ah,” said he, “I forgot that I had not seen you for some weeks. It isa little souvenir from the King of Bohemia in return for my assistancein the case of the Irene Adler papers.”



“And the ring?” I asked, glancing at a remarkable brilliant whichsparkled upon his finger.



“It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in whichI served them was of such delicacy that I cannot confide it even toyou, who have been good enough to chronicle one or two of my littleproblems.”





“And have you any on hand just now?” I asked, with interest.



“Some ten or twelve, but none which present any feature of interest.

They are important, you understand, without being interesting. Indeed,

I have found that it is usually in unimportant matters that there isa field for the observation, and for the quick analysis of cause andeffect which gives the charm to an investigation. The larger crimes areapt to be the simpler, for the bigger the crime, the more obvious, asa rule, is the motive. In these cases, save for one rather intricatematter which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothingwhich presents any features of interest. It is possible, however, thatI may have something better before very many minutes are over, for thisis one of my clients, or I am much mistaken.”



He had risen from his chair, and was standing between the partedblinds, gazing down into the dull, neutral-tinted London street.

Looking over his shoulder, I saw that on the pavement opposite therestood a large woman with a heavy fur boa round her neck, and a largecurling red feather in a broad-brimmed hat which was tilted in acoquettish Duchess-of-Devonshire fashion over her ear. From underthis great panoply she peeped up in a nervous, hesitating fashion atour windows, while her body oscillated backward and forward, and herfingers fidgetted with her glove buttons. Suddenly, with a plunge, asof the swimmer who leaves the bank, she hurried across the road, and weheard the sharp clang of the bell.



“I have seen those symptoms before,” said Holmes, throwing hiscigarette into the fire. “Oscillation upon the pavement always means anaffaire de cœur. She would like advice, but is not sure that thematter is not too delicate for communication. And yet even here we maydiscriminate. When a woman has been seriously wronged by a man she nolonger oscillates, and the usual symptom is a broken bell wire. Here wemay take it that there is a love matter, but that the maiden is not somuch angry as perplexed, or grieved. But here she comes in person toresolve our doubts.”



As he spoke there was a tap at the door, and the boy in buttons enteredto announce Miss Mary Sutherland, while the lady herself loomed behindhis small black figure like a full-sailed merchant-man behind a tinypilot boat. Sherlock Holmes welcomed her with the easy courtesy forwhich he was remarkable, and having closed the door, and bowed her intoan arm-chair, he looked her over in the minute, and yet abstractedfashion which was peculiar to him.



“Do you not find,” he said, “that with your short sight it is a littletrying to do so much type-writing?”



“I did at first,” she answered, “but now I know where the lettersare without looking.” Then, suddenly realizing the full purport ofhis words, she gave a violent start and looked up, with fear andastonishment upon her broad, good-humored face. “You’ve heard about me,

Mr. Holmes,” she cried, “else how could you know all that?”



“Never mind,” said Holmes, laughing; “it is my business to know things.

Perhaps I have trained myself to see what others overlook. If not, whyshould you come to consult me?”



“I came to you, sir, because I heard of you from Mrs. Etherege, whosehusband you found so easy when the police and every one had given himup for dead. Oh, Mr. Holmes, I wish you would do as much for me. I’mnot rich, but still I have a hundred a year in my own right, besidesthe little that I make by the machine, and I would give it all to knowwhat has become of Mr. Hosmer Angel.”



“Why did you come away to consult me in such a hurry?” asked SherlockHolmes, with his finger-tips together, and his eyes to the ceiling.



Again a startled look came over the somewhat vacuous face of Miss MarySutherland. “Yes, I did bang out of the house,” she said, “for itmade me angry to see the easy way in which Mr. Windibank—that is, myfather—took it all. He would not go to the police, and he would notgo to you, and so at last, as he would do nothing, and kept on sayingthat there was no harm done, it made me mad, and I just on with mythings and came right away to you.”



“Your father,” said Holmes, “your step-father, surely, since the nameis different.”



“Yes, my step-father. I call him father, though it sounds funny, too,

for he is only five years and two months older than myself.”



“And your mother is alive?”



“Oh yes, mother is alive and well. I wasn’t best pleased, Mr. Holmes,

when she married again so soon after father’s death, and a man who wasnearly fifteen years younger than herself. Father was a plumber in theTottenham Court Road, and he left a tidy business behind him, whichmother carried on with Mr. Hardy, the foreman; but when Mr. Windibankcame he made her sell the business, for he was very superior, being atraveller in wines. They got £4700 for the goodwill and interest, whichwasn’t near as much as father could have got if he had been alive.”



I had expected to see Sherlock Holmes impatient under this rambling andinconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he had listened withthe greatest concentration of attention.



“Your own little income,” he asked, “does it come out of the business?”



“Oh no, sir. It is quite separate, and was left me by my Uncle Nedin Auckland. It is in New Zealand stock, paying 4-1/2 per cent. Twothousand five hundred pounds was the amount, but I can only touch theinterest.”



“You interest me extremely,” said Holmes. “And since you draw so largea sum as a hundred a year, with what you earn into the bargain, you nodoubt travel a little, and indulge yourself in every way. I believethat a single lady can get on very nicely upon an income of about £60.”







“SHERLOCK HOLMES WELCOMED HER”













“I could do with much less than that, Mr. Holmes, but you understandthat as long as I live at home I don’t wish to be a burden to them, andso they have the use of the money just while I am staying with them. Ofcourse, that is only just for the time. Mr. Windibank draws my interestevery quarter, and pays it over to mother, and I find that I can dopretty well with what I earn at type-writing. It brings me twopence asheet, and I can often do from fifteen to twenty sheets in a day.”



“You have made your position very clear to me,” said Holmes. “This ismy friend, Dr. Watson, before whom you can speak as freely as beforemyself. Kindly tell us now all about your connection with Mr. HosmerAngel.”



A flush stole over Miss Sutherland’s face, and she picked nervously atthe fringe of her jacket. “I met him first at the gasfitters’ ball,”she said. “They used to send father tickets when he was alive, and thenafterwards they remembered us, and sent them to mother. Mr. Windibankdid not wish us to go. He never did wish us to go anywhere. He wouldget quite mad if I wanted so much as to join a Sunday-school treat.

But this time I was set on going, and I would go; for what right hadhe to prevent? He said the folk were not fit for us to know, when allfather’s friends were to be there. And he said that I had nothing fitto wear, when I had my purple plush that I had never so much as takenout of the drawer. At last, when nothing else would do, he went offto France upon the business of the firm, but we went, mother and I,

with Mr. Hardy, who used to be our foreman, and it was there I met Mr.

Hosmer Angel.”



“I suppose,” said Holmes, “that when Mr. Windibank came back fromFrance he was very annoyed at your having gone to the ball.”



“Oh, well, he was very good about it. He laughed, I remember, andshrugged his shoulders, and said there was no use denying anything to awoman, for she would have her way.”



“I see. Then at the gasfitters’ ball you met, as I understand, agentleman called Mr. Hosmer Angel.”



“Yes, sir. I met him that night, and he called next day to ask if wehad got home all safe, and after that we met him—that is to say, Mr.

Holmes, I met him twice for walks, but after that father came backagain, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house any more.”



“No?”



“Well, you know, father didn’t like anything of the sort. He wouldn’thave any visitors if he could help it, and he used to say that a womanshould be happy in her own family circle. But then, as I used to say tomother, a woman wants her own circle to begin with, and I had not gotmine yet.”



“But how about Mr. Hosmer Angel? Did he make no attempt to see you?”



“Well, father was going off to France again in a week, and Hosmer wroteand said that it would be safer and better not to see each other untilhe had gone. We could write in the mean time, and he used to writeevery day. I took the letters in in the morning, so there was no needfor father to know.”



“Were you engaged to the gentleman at this time?”



“Oh yes, Mr. Holmes. We were engaged after the first walk that wetook. Hosmer—Mr. Angel—was a cashier in an office in LeadenhallStreet—and—”



“What office?”



“That’s the worst of it, Mr. Holmes, I don’t know.”



“Where did he live, then?”



“He slept on the premises.”



“And you don’t know his address?”



“No—except that it was Leadenhall Street.”



“Where did you address your letters, then?”



“To the Leadenhall Street Post-office, to be left till called for. Hesaid that if they were sent to the office he would be chaffed by allthe other clerks about having letters from a lady, so I offered totype-write them, like he did his, but he wouldn’t have that, for hesaid that when I wrote them they seemed to come from me, but when theywere type-written he always felt that the machine had come between us.

That will just show you how fond he was of me, Mr. Holmes, and thelittle things that he would think of.”



“It was most suggestive,” said Holmes. “It has long been an axiom ofmine that the little things are infinitely the most important. Can youremember any other little things about Mr. Hosmer Angel?”



“He was a very shy man, Mr. Holmes. He would rather walk with me inthe evening than in the daylight, for he said that he hated to beconspicuous. Very retiring and gentlemanly he was. Even his voice wasgentle. He’d had the quinsy and swollen glands when he was young, hetold me, and it had left him with a weak throat, and a hesitating,

whispering fashion of speech. He was always well dressed, very neat andplain, but his eyes were weak, just as mine are, and he wore tintedglasses against the glare.”



“Well, and what happened when Mr. Windibank, your step-father, returnedto France?”



“Mr. Hosmer Angel came to the house again, and proposed that we shouldmarry before father came back. He was in dreadful earnest, and mademe swear, with my hands on the Testament, that whatever happened Iwould always be true to him. Mother said he was quite right to make meswear, and that it was a sign of his passion. Mother was all in hisfavor from the first, and was even fonder of him than I was. Then, whenthey talked of marrying within the week, I began to ask about father;but they both said never to mind about father, but just to tell himafterwards, and mother said she would make it all right with him. Ididn’t quite like that, Mr. Holmes. It seemed funny that I should askhis leave, as he was only a few years older than me; but I didn’t wantto do anything on the sly, so I wrote to father at Bordeaux, where thecompany has its French offices, but the letter came back to me on thevery morning of the wedding.”



“It missed him, then?”



“Yes, sir; for he had started to England just before it arrived.”





“Ha! that was unfortunate. Your wedding was arranged, then, for theFriday. Was it to be in church?”



“Yes, sir, but very quietly. It was to be at St. Saviour’s, near King’sCross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St. PancrasHotel. Hosmer came for us in a hansom, but as there were two of us, heput us both into it, and stepped himself into a four-wheeler, whichhappened to be the only other cab in the street. We got to the churchfirst, and when the four-wheeler drove up we waited for him to stepout, but he never did, and when the cabman got down from the box andlooked, there was no one there! The cabman said that he could notimagine what had become of him, for he had seen him get in with his owneyes. That was last Friday, Mr. Holmes, and I have never seen or heardanything since then to throw any light upon what became of him.”



“It seems to me that you have been very shamefully treated,” saidHolmes.



“Oh no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all themorning he was saying to me that, whatever happened, I was to be true;and that even if something quite unforeseen occurred to separateus, I was always to remember that I was pledged to him, and that hewould claim his pledge sooner or later. It seemed strange talk for awedding-morning, but what has happened since gives a meaning to it.”



“Most certainly it does. Your own opinion is, then, that someunforeseen catastrophe has occurred to him?”



“Yes, sir. I believe that he foresaw some danger, or else he would nothave talked so. And then I think that what he foresaw happened.”



“But you have no notion as to what it could have been?”



“None.”



“One more question. How did your mother take the matter?”



“She was angry, and said that I was never to speak of the matter again.”



“And your father? Did you tell him?”





“Yes; and he seemed to think, with me, that something had happened, andthat I should hear of Hosmer again. As he said, what interest could anyone have in bringing me to the doors of the church, and then leavingme? Now, if he had borrowed my money, or if he had married me and gotmy money settled on him, there might be some reason; but Hosmer wasvery independent about money, and never would look at a shilling ofmine. And yet, what could have happened? And why could he not write?

Oh, it drives me half-mad to think of! and I can’t sleep a wink atnight.” She pulled a little handkerchief out of her muff, and began tosob heavily into it.



“I shall glance into the case for you,” said Holmes, rising; “and Ihave no doubt that we shall reach some definite result. Let the weightof the matter rest upon me now, and do not let your mind dwell uponit further. Above all, try to let Mr. Hosmer Angel vanish from yourmemory, as he has done from your life.”



“Then you don’t think I’ll see him again?”



“I fear not.”



“Then what has happened to him?”



“You will leave that question in my hands. I should like an accuratedescription of him, and any letters of his which you can spare.”



“I advertised for him in last Saturday’s Chronicle,” said she. “Hereis the slip, and here are four letters from him.”



“Thank you. And your address?”



“No. 31 Lyon Place, Camberwell.”



“Mr. Angel’s address you never had, I understand. Where is yourfather’s place of business?”



“He travels for Westhouse & Marbank, the great claret importers ofFenchurch Street.”



“Thank you. You have made your statement very clearly. You will leavethe papers here, and remember the advice which I have given you. Letthe whole incident be a sealed book, and do not allow it to affect yourlife.”



“You are very kind, Mr. Holmes, but I cannot do that. I shall be trueto Hosmer. He shall find me ready when he comes back.”



For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was somethingnoble in the simple faith of our visitor which compelled our respect.

She laid her little bundle of papers upon the table, and went her way,

with a promise to come again whenever she might be summoned.



Sherlock Holmes sat silent for a few minutes with his finger-tips stillpressed together, his legs stretched out in front of him, and his gazedirected upward to the ceiling. Then he took down from the rack theold and oily clay pipe, which was to him as a counsellor, and, havinglit it, he leaned back in his chair, with the thick blue cloud-wreathsspinning up from him, and a look of infinite languor in his face.



“Quite an interesting study, that maiden,” he observed. “I found hermore interesting than her little problem, which, by the way, is rathera trite one. You will find parallel cases, if you consult my index, inAndover in ’77, and there was something of the sort at The Hague lastyear. Old as is the idea, however, there were one or two details whichwere new to me. But the maiden herself was most instructive.”



“You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite invisible tome,” I remarked.



“Not invisible, but unnoticed, Watson. You did not know where to look,

and so you missed all that was important. I can never bring you torealize the importance of sleeves, the suggestiveness of thumb-nails,

or the great issues that may hang from a boot-lace. Now, what did yougather from that woman’s appearance? Describe it.”



“Well, she had a slate-colored, broad-brimmed straw hat, with a featherof a brickish red. Her jacket was black, with black beads sewn upon it,

and a fringe of little black jet ornaments. Her dress was brown, ratherdarker than coffee color, with a little purple plush at the neck andsleeves. Her gloves were grayish, and were worn through at the rightforefinger. Her boots I didn’t observe. She had small, round, hanginggold ear-rings, and a general air of being fairly well-to-do, in avulgar, comfortable, easy-going way.”



Sherlock Holmes clapped his hands softly together and chuckled.



“’Pon my word, Watson, you are coming along wonderfully. You havereally done very well indeed. It is true that you have missedeverything of importance, but you have hit upon the method, and youhave a quick eye for color. Never trust to general impressions, my boy,

but concentrate yourself upon details. My first glance is always at awoman’s sleeve. In a man it is perhaps better first to take the kneeof the trouser. As you observe, this woman had plush upon her sleeves,

which is a most useful material for showing traces. The double linea little above the wrist, where the type-writist presses against thetable, was beautifully defined. The sewing-machine, of the hand type,

leaves a similar mark, but only on the left arm, and on the side of itfarthest from the thumb, instead of being right across the broadestpart, as this was. I then glanced at her face, and observing the dintof a pince-nez at either side of her nose, I ventured a remark uponshort sight and type-writing, which seemed to surprise her.”



“It surprised me.”



“But, surely, it was very obvious. I was then much surprised andinterested on glancing down to observe that, though the boots which shewas wearing were not unlike each other, they were really odd ones; theone having a slightly decorated toe-cap, and the other a plain one.

One was buttoned only in the two lower buttons out of five, and theother at the first, third, and fifth. Now, when you see that a younglady, otherwise neatly dressed, has come away from home with odd boots,

half-buttoned, it is no great deduction to say that she came away in ahurry.”



“And what else?” I asked, keenly interested, as I always was, by myfriend’s incisive reasoning.



“I noted, in passing, that she had written a note before leaving home,

but after being fully dressed. You observed that her right glove wastorn at the forefinger, but you did not apparently see that both gloveand finger were stained with violet ink. She had written in a hurry,

and dipped her pen too deep. It must have been this morning, or themark would not remain clear upon the finger. All this is amusing,

though rather elementary, but I must go back to business, Watson. Wouldyou mind reading me the advertised description of Mr. Hosmer Angel?”



I held the little printed slip to the light. “Missing,” it said, “onthe morning of the 14th, a gentleman named Hosmer Angel. About 5 ft. 7in. in height; strongly built, sallow complexion, black hair, a littlebald in the centre, bushy, black side-whiskers and mustache; tintedglasses, slight infirmity of speech. Was dressed, when last seen, inblack frock-coat faced with silk, black waistcoat, gold Albert chain,

and gray Harris tweed trousers, with brown gaiters over elastic-sidedboots. Known to have been employed in an office in Leadenhall Street.

Anybody bringing,” etc., etc.



“That will do,” said Holmes. “As to the letters,” he continued,

glancing over them, “they are very commonplace. Absolutely no clewin them to Mr. Angel, save that he quotes Balzac once. There is oneremarkable point, however, which will no doubt strike you.”



“They are type-written,” I remarked.



“Not only that, but the signature is type-written. Look at the neatlittle ‘Hosmer Angel’ at the bottom. There is a date, you see, but nosuperscription except Leadenhall Street, which is rather vague. Thepoint about the signature is very suggestive—in fact, we may call itconclusive.”



“Of what?”



“My dear fellow, is it possible you do not see how strongly it bearsupon the case?”



“I cannot say that I do, unless it were that he wished to be able todeny his signature if an action for breach of promise were instituted.”



“No, that was not the point. However, I shall write two letters, whichshould settle the matter. One is to a firm in the city, the other isto the young lady’s step-father, Mr. Windibank, asking him whether hecould meet us here at six o’clock to-morrow evening. It is just as wellthat we should do business with the male relatives. And now, doctor, wecan do nothing until the answers to those letters come, so we may putour little problem upon the shelf for the interim.”



I had had so many reasons to believe in my friend’s subtle powers ofreasoning, and extraordinary energy in action, that I felt that he musthave some solid grounds for the assured and easy demeanor with which hetreated the singular mystery which he had been called upon to fathom.

Once only had I known him to fail, in the case of the King of Bohemiaand of the Irene Adler photograph; but when I looked back to the weirdbusiness of the Sign of Four, and the extraordinary circumstancesconnected with the Study in Scarlet, I felt that it would be a strangetangle indeed which he could not unravel.



I left him then, still puffing at his black clay pipe, with theconviction that when I came again on the next evening I would find thathe held in his hands all the clews which would lead up to the identityof the disappearing bridegroom of Miss Mary Sutherland.



A professional case of great gravity was engaging my own attention atthe time, and the whole of next day I was busy at the bedside of thesufferer. It was not until close upon six o’clock that I found myselffree, and was able to spring into a hansom and drive to Baker Street,

half afraid that I might be too late to assist at the dénouementof the little mystery. I found Sherlock Holmes alone, however, halfasleep, with his long, thin form curled up in the recesses of hisarm-chair. A formidable array of bottles and test-tubes, with thepungent cleanly smell of hydrochloric acid, told me that he had spenthis day in the chemical work which was so dear to him.



“Well, have you solved it?” I asked, as I entered.



“Yes. It was the bisulphate of baryta.”





“No, no, the mystery!” I cried.



“Oh, that! I thought of the salt that I have been working upon. Therewas never any mystery in the matter, though, as I said yesterday, someof the details are of interest. The only drawback is that there is nolaw, I fear, that can touch the scoundrel.”



“Who was he, then, and what was his object in deserting MissSutherland?”



The question was hardly out of my mouth, and Holmes had not yet openedhis lips to reply, when we heard a heavy footfall in the passage, and atap at the door.



“This is the girl’s step-father, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes. “Hehas written to me to say that he would be here at six. Come in!”



The man who entered was a sturdy, middle-sized fellow, some thirtyyears of age, clean shaven, and sallow skinned, with a bland,

insinuating manner, and a pair of wonderfully sharp and penetratinggray eyes. He shot a questioning glance at each of us, placed his shinytop hat upon the sideboard, and with a slight bow sidled down into thenearest chair.



“Good-evening, Mr. James Windibank,” said Holmes. “I think that thistype-written letter is from you, in which you made an appointment withme for six o’clock?”



“Yes, sir. I am afraid that I am a little late, but I am not quite myown master, you know. I am sorry that Miss Sutherland has troubled youabout this little matter, for I think it is far better not to washlinen of the sort in public. It was quite against my wishes that shecame, but she is a very excitable, impulsive girl, as you may havenoticed, and she is not easily controlled when she has made up hermind on a point. Of course, I did not mind you so much, as you are notconnected with the official police, but it is not pleasant to have afamily misfortune like this noised abroad. Besides, it is a uselessexpense, for how could you possibly find this Hosmer Angel?”





“On the contrary,” said Holmes, quietly; “I have every reason tobelieve that I will succeed in discovering Mr. Hosmer Angel.”



Mr. Windibank gave a violent start, and dropped his gloves. “I amdelighted to hear it,” he said.



“It is a curious thing,” remarked Holmes, “that a type-writer hasreally quite as much individuality as a man’s handwriting. Unless theyare quite new, no two of them write exactly alike. Some letters getmore worn than others, and some wear only on one side. Now, you remarkin this note of yours, Mr. Windibank, that in every case there is somelittle slurring over of the ‘e,’ and a slight defect in the tail of the‘r.’ There are fourteen other characteristics, but those are the moreobvious.”



“We do all our correspondence with this machine at the office, and nodoubt it is a little worn,” our visitor answered, glancing keenly atHolmes with his bright little eyes.



“And now I will show you what is really a very interesting study,

Mr. Windibank,” Holmes continued. “I think of writing another littlemonograph some of these days on the type-writer and its relation tocrime. It is a subject to which I have devoted some little attention.

I have here four letters which purport to come from the missing man.

They are all type-written. In each case, not only are the ‘e’s’ slurredand the ‘r’s’ tailless, but you will observe, if you care to use mymagnifying lens, that the fourteen other characteristics to which Ihave alluded are there as well.”



Mr. Windibank sprang out of his chair, and picked up his hat. “I cannotwaste time over this sort of fantastic talk, Mr. Holmes,” he said. “Ifyou can catch the man, catch him, and let me know when you have doneit.”



“Certainly,” said Holmes, stepping over and turning the key in thedoor. “I let you know, then, that I have caught him!”



“What! where?” shouted Mr. Windibank, turning white to his lips, andglancing about him like a rat in a trap.





“Oh, it won’t do—really it won’t,” said Holmes, suavely. “There is nopossible getting out of it, Mr. Windibank. It is quite too transparent,

and it was a very bad compliment when you said that it was impossiblefor me to solve so simple a question. That’s right! Sit down, and letus talk it over.”



Our visitor collapsed into a chair, with a ghastly face, and a glitterof moisture on his brow. “It—it’s not actionable,” he stammered.



“I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,

Windibank, it was as cruel and selfish and heartless a trick in a pettyway as ever came before me. Now, let me just run over the course ofevents, and you will contradict me if I go wrong.”



The man sat huddled up in his chair, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, like one who is utterly crushed. Holmes stuck his feet up onthe corner of the mantel-piece, and, leaning back with his hands in hispockets, began talking, rather to himself, as it seemed, than to us.



“The man married a woman very much older than himself for her money,”said he, “and he enjoyed the use of the money of the daughter as longas she lived with them. It was a considerable sum, for people in theirposition, and the loss of it would have made a serious difference.

It was worth an effort to preserve it. The daughter was of a good,

amiable disposition, but affectionate and warm-hearted in her ways, sothat it was evident that with her fair personal advantages, and herlittle income, she would not be allowed to remain single long. Now hermarriage would mean, of course, the loss of a hundred a year, so whatdoes her step-father do to prevent it? He takes the obvious course ofkeeping her at home, and forbidding her to seek the company of peopleof her own age. But soon he found that that would not answer forever.

She became restive, insisted upon her rights, and finally announced herpositive intention of going to a certain ball. What does her cleverstep-father do then? He conceives an idea more creditable to his headthan to his heart. With the connivance and assistance of his wife hedisguised himself, covered those keen eyes with tinted glasses, maskedthe face with a mustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clearvoice into an insinuating whisper, and doubly secure on account of thegirl’s short sight, he appears as Mr. Hosmer Angel, and keeps off otherlovers by making love himself.”












“GLANCING ABOUT HIM LIKE A RAT IN A TRAP”











“It was only a joke at first,” groaned our visitor. “We never thoughtthat she would have been so carried away.”



“Very likely not. However that may be, the young lady was verydecidedly carried away, and having quite made up her mind that herstep-father was in France, the suspicion of treachery never foran instant entered her mind. She was flattered by the gentleman’sattentions, and the effect was increased by the loudly expressedadmiration of her mother. Then Mr. Angel began to call, for it wasobvious that the matter should be pushed as far as it would go,

if a real effect were to be produced. There were meetings, and anengagement, which would finally secure the girl’s affections fromturning towards any one else. But the deception could not be kept upforever. These pretended journeys to France were rather cumbrous. Thething to do was clearly to bring the business to an end in such adramatic manner that it would leave a permanent impression upon theyoung lady’s mind, and prevent her from looking upon any other suitorfor some time to come. Hence those vows of fidelity exacted upon aTestament, and hence also the allusions to a possibility of somethinghappening on the very morning of the wedding. James Windibank wishedMiss Sutherland to be so bound to Hosmer Angel, and so uncertain as tohis fate, that for ten years to come, at any rate, she would not listento another man. As far as the church door he brought her, and then, ashe could go no farther, he conveniently vanished away by the old trickof stepping in at one door of a four-wheeler, and out at the other. Ithink that that was the chain of events, Mr. Windibank!”







Our visitor had recovered something of his assurance while Holmes hadbeen talking, and he rose from his chair now with a cold sneer upon hispale face.



“It may be so, or it may not, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “but if you are sovery sharp you ought to be sharp enough to know that it is you who arebreaking the law now, and not me. I have done nothing actionable fromthe first, but as long as you keep that door locked you lay yourselfopen to an action for assault and illegal constraint.”



“The law cannot, as you say, touch you,” said Holmes, unlocking andthrowing open the door, “yet there never was a man who deservedpunishment more. If the young lady has a brother or a friend, he oughtto lay a whip across your shoulders. By Jove!” he continued, flushingup at the sight of the bitter sneer upon the man’s face, “it is notpart of my duties to my client, but here’s a hunting crop handy, and Ithink I shall just treat myself to—” He took two swift steps to thewhip, but before he could grasp it there was a wild clatter of stepsupon the stairs, the heavy hall door banged, and from the window wecould see Mr. James Windibank running at the top of his speed down theroad.



“There’s a cold-blooded scoundrel!” said Holmes, laughing, as he threwhimself down into his chair once more. “That fellow will rise fromcrime to crime until he does something very bad, and ends on a gallows.

The case has, in some respects, been not entirely devoid of interest.”



“I cannot now entirely see all the steps of your reasoning,” I remarked.



“Well, of course it was obvious from the first that this Mr. HosmerAngel must have some strong object for his curious conduct, and it wasequally clear that the only man who really profited by the incident,

as far as we could see, was the step-father. Then the fact that thetwo men were never together, but that the one always appeared whenthe other was away, was suggestive. So were the tinted spectacles andthe curious voice, which both hinted at a disguise, as did the bushywhiskers. My suspicions were all confirmed by his peculiar actionin type-writing his signature, which, of course, inferred that hishandwriting was so familiar to her that she would recognize even thesmallest sample of it. You see all these isolated facts, together withmany minor ones, all pointed in the same direction.”



“And how did you verify them?”



“Having once spotted my man, it was easy to get corroboration. Iknew the firm for which this man worked. Having taken the printeddescription, I eliminated everything from it which could be the resultof a disguise—the whiskers, the glasses, the voice, and I sent itto the firm, with a request that they would inform me whether itanswered to the description of any of their travellers. I had alreadynoticed the peculiarities of the type-writer, and I wrote to the manhimself at his business address, asking him if he would come here. AsI expected, his reply was type-written, and revealed the same trivialbut characteristic defects. The same post brought me a letter fromWesthouse & Marbank, of Fenchurch Street, to say that the descriptiontallied in every respect with that of their employé, James Windibank.

Voila tout!”



“And Miss Sutherland?”



“If I tell her she will not believe me. You may remember the oldPersian saying, ‘There is danger for him who taketh the tiger cub, anddanger also for whoso snatches a delusion from a woman.’ There is asmuch sense in Hafiz as in Horace, and as much knowledge of the world.”







Adventure IVTHE BOSCOMBE VALLEY MYSTERY











WE were seated at breakfast one morning, my wife and I, when the maidbrought in a telegram. It was from Sherlock Holmes, and ran in this way:



“Have you a couple of days to spare? Have just been wired for fromthe West of England in connection with Boscombe Valley tragedy. Shallbe glad if you will come with me. Air and scenery perfect. LeavePaddington by the 11.15.”



“What do you say, dear?” said my wife, looking across at me. “Will yougo?”



“I really don’t know what to say. I have a fairly long list at present.”



“Oh, Anstruther would do your work for you. You have been looking alittle pale lately. I think that the change would do you good, and youare always so interested in Mr. Sherlock Holmes’s cases.”



“I should be ungrateful if I were not, seeing what I gained through oneof them,” I answered. “But if I am to go, I must pack at once, for Ihave only half an hour.”



My experience of camp life in Afghanistan had at least had the effectof making me a prompt and ready traveller. My wants were few andsimple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a cab with myvalise, rattling away to Paddington Station. Sherlock Holmes was pacingup and down the platform, his tall, gaunt figure made even gaunter andtaller by his long gray travelling-cloak and close-fitting cloth cap.









“It is really very good of you to come, Watson,” said he. “It makes aconsiderable difference to me, having some one with me on whom I canthoroughly rely. Local aid is always either worthless or else biassed.

If you will keep the two corner seats I shall get the tickets.”



We had the carriage to ourselves save for an immense litter of paperswhich Holmes had brought with him. Among these he rummaged and read,

with intervals of note-taking and of meditation, until we were pastReading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a gigantic ball, andtossed them up onto the rack.



“Have you heard anything of the case?” he asked.



“Not a word. I have not seen a paper for some days.”



“The London press has not had very full accounts. I have justbeen looking through all the recent papers in order to master theparticulars. It seems, from what I gather, to be one of those simplecases which are so extremely difficult.”



“That sounds a little paradoxical.”



“But it is profoundly true. Singularity is almost invariably a clew.

The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more difficult isit to bring it home. In this case, however, they have established avery serious case against the son of the murdered man.”



“It is a murder, then?”



“Well, it is conjectured to be so. I shall take nothing for granteduntil I have the opportunity of looking personally into it. I willexplain the state of things to you, as far as I have been able tounderstand it, in a very few words.



“Boscombe Valley is a country district not very far from Ross, inHerefordshire. The largest landed proprietor in that part is a Mr. JohnTurner, who made his money in Australia, and returned some years ago tothe old country. One of the farms which he held, that of Hatherley, waslet to Mr. Charles McCarthy, who was also an ex-Australian. The men hadknown each other in the colonies, so that it was not unnatural thatwhen they came to settle down they should do so as near each other aspossible. Turner was apparently the richer man, so McCarthy became histenant, but still remained, it seems, upon terms of perfect equality,

as they were frequently together. McCarthy had one son, a lad ofeighteen, and Turner had an only daughter of the same age, but neitherof them had wives living. They appear to have avoided the society ofthe neighboring English families, and to have led retired lives, thoughboth the McCarthys were fond of sport, and were frequently seen atthe race-meetings of the neighborhood. McCarthy kept two servants—aman and a girl. Turner had a considerable household, some half-dozenat the least. That is as much as I have been able to gather about thefamilies. Now for the facts.



“On June 3, that is, on Monday last, McCarthy left his house atHatherley about three in the afternoon, and walked down to the BoscombePool, which is a small lake formed by the spreading out of thestream which runs down the Boscombe Valley. He had been out with hisserving-man in the morning at Ross, and he had told the man that hemust hurry, as he had an appointment of importance to keep at three.

From that appointment he never came back alive.



“From Hatherley Farm-house to the Boscombe Pool is a quarter of a mile,

and two people saw him as he passed over this ground. One was an oldwoman, whose name is not mentioned, and the other was William Crowder,

a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both these witnesses deposethat Mr. McCarthy was walking alone. The game-keeper adds that withina few minutes of his seeing Mr. McCarthy pass he had seen his son, Mr.

James McCarthy, going the same way with a gun under his arm. To thebest of his belief, the father was actually in sight at the time, andthe son was following him. He thought no more of the matter until heheard in the evening of the tragedy that had occurred.



“The two McCarthys were seen after the time when William Crowder, thegame-keeper, lost sight of them. The Boscombe Pool is thickly-woodedround, with just a fringe of grass and of reeds round the edge. A girlof fourteen, Patience Moran, who is the daughter of the lodge-keeper ofthe Boscombe Valley estate, was in one of the woods picking flowers.

She states that while she was there she saw, at the border of the woodand close by the lake, Mr. McCarthy and his son, and that they appearedto be having a violent quarrel. She heard Mr. McCarthy the elder usingvery strong language to his son, and she saw the latter raise uphis hand as if to strike his father. She was so frightened by theirviolence that she ran away, and told her mother when she reached homethat she had left the two McCarthys quarrelling near Boscombe Pool, andthat she was afraid that they were going to fight. She had hardly saidthe words when young Mr. McCarthy came running up to the lodge to saythat he had found his father dead in the wood, and to ask for the helpof the lodge-keeper. He was much excited, without either his gun or hishat, and his right hand and sleeve were observed to be stained withfresh blood. On following him they found the dead body stretched outupon the grass beside the Pool. The head had been beaten in by repeatedblows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as mightvery well have been inflicted by the butt-end of his son’s gun, whichwas found lying on the grass within a few paces of the body. Underthese circumstances the young man was instantly arrested, and a verdictof ‘Wilful Murder’ having been returned at the inquest on Tuesday,

he was on Wednesday brought before the magistrates at Ross, who havereferred the case to the next assizes. Those are the main facts of thecase as they came out before the coroner and at the police-court.”



“I could hardly imagine a more damning case,” I remarked. “If evercircumstantial evidence pointed to a criminal it does so here.”



“Circumstantial evidence is a very tricky thing,” answered Holmes,

thoughtfully. “It may seem to point very straight to one thing, but ifyou shift your own point of view a little, you may find it pointingin an equally uncompromising manner to something entirely different.

It must be confessed, however, that the case looks exceedingly graveagainst the young man, and it is very possible that he is indeed theculprit. There are several people in the neighborhood, however, andamong them Miss Turner, the daughter of the neighboring land-owner,

who believe in his innocence, and who have retained Lestrade, whom youmay recollect in connection with the Study in Scarlet, to work out thecase in his interest. Lestrade, being rather puzzled, has referred thecase to me, and hence it is that two middle-aged gentlemen are flyingwestward at fifty miles an hour, instead of quietly digesting theirbreakfasts at home.”



“I am afraid,” said I, “that the facts are so obvious that you willfind little credit to be gained out of this case.”



“There is nothing more deceptive than an obvious fact,” he answered,

laughing. “Besides, we may chance to hit upon some other obvious factswhich may have been by no means obvious to Mr. Lestrade. You know metoo well to think that I am boasting when I say that I shall eitherconfirm or destroy his theory by means which he is quite incapable ofemploying, or even of understanding. To take the first example to hand,

I very clearly perceive that in your bedroom the window is upon theright-hand side, and yet I question whether Mr. Lestrade would havenoted even so self-evident a thing as that.”



“How on earth—”



“My dear fellow, I know you well. I know the military neatness whichcharacterizes you. You shave every morning, and in this season youshave by the sunlight; but since your shaving is less and less completeas we get farther back on the left side, until it becomes positivelyslovenly as we get round the angle of the jaw, it is surely very clearthat that side is less well illuminated than the other. I could notimagine a man of your habits looking at himself in an equal light, andbeing satisfied with such a result. I only quote this as a trivialexample of observation and inference. Therein lies my métier, and itis just possible that it may be of some service in the investigationwhich lies before us. There are one or two minor points which werebrought out in the inquest, and which are worth considering.”







“THEY FOUND THE BODY”











“What are they?”







“It appears that his arrest did not take place at once, but after thereturn to Hatherley Farm. On the inspector of constabulary informinghim that he was a prisoner, he remarked that he was not surprised tohear it, and that it was no more than his deserts. This observation ofhis had the natural

effect of removing any traces of doubt which mighthave remained in the minds of the coroner’s jury.”



“It was a confession,” I ejaculated.



“No, for it was followed by a protestation of innocence.”



“Coming on the top of such a damning series of events, it was at leasta most suspicious remark.”



“On the contrary,” said Holmes, “it is the brightest rift which I canat present see in the clouds. However innocent he might be, he couldnot be such an absolute imbecile as not to see that the circumstanceswere very black against him. Had he appeared surprised at his ownarrest, or feigned indignation at it, I should have looked upon it ashighly suspicious, because such surprise or anger would not be naturalunder the circumstances, and yet might appear to be the best policyto a scheming man. His frank acceptance of the situation marks him aseither an innocent man, or else as a man of considerable self-restraintand firmness. As to his remark about his deserts, it was also notunnatural if you consider that he stood beside the dead body of hisfather, and that there is no doubt that he had that very day so farforgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and even,

according to the little girl whose evidence is so important, to raisehis hand as if to strike him. The self-reproach and contrition whichare displayed in his remark appear to me to be the signs of a healthymind, rather than of a guilty one.”









I shook my head. “Many men have been hanged on far slighter evidence,”I remarked.



“So they have. And many men have been wrongfully hanged.”



“What is the young man’s own account of the matter?”



“It is, I am afraid, not very encouraging to his supporters, thoughthere are one or two points in it which are suggestive. You will findit here, and may read it for yourself.”



He picked out from his bundle a copy of the local Herefordshire paper,

and having turned down the sheet, he pointed out the paragraph in whichthe unfortunate young man had given his own statement of what hadoccurred. I settled myself down in the corner of the carriage, and readit very carefully. It ran in this way:



“Mr. James McCarthy, the only son of the deceased, was then called, andgave evidence as follows: ‘I had been away from home for three days atBristol, and had only just returned upon the morning of last Monday,

the 3rd. My father was absent from home at the time of my arrival, andI was informed by the maid that he had driven over to Ross with JohnCobb, the groom. Shortly after my return I heard the wheels of his trapin the yard, and, looking out of my window, I saw him get out and walkrapidly out of the yard, though I was not aware in which direction hewas going. I then took my gun, and strolled out in the direction ofthe Boscombe Pool, with the intention of visiting the rabbit-warrenwhich is upon the other side. On my way I saw William Crowder, thegame-keeper, as he had stated in his evidence; but he is mistaken inthinking that I was following my father. I had no idea that he was infront of me. When about a hundred yards from the Pool I heard a cry of“Cooee!” which was a usual signal between my father and myself. I thenhurried forward, and found him standing by the Pool. He appeared to bemuch surprised at seeing me, and asked me rather roughly what I wasdoing there. A conversation ensued which led to high words, and almostto blows, for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeingthat his passion was becoming ungovernable, I left him, and returnedtowards Hatherley Farm. I had not gone more than 150 yards, however,

when I heard a hideous outcry behind me, which caused me to run backagain. I found my father expiring upon the ground, with his headterribly injured. I dropped my gun, and held him in my arms, but healmost instantly expired. I knelt beside him for some minutes, and thenmade my way to Mr. Turner’s lodge-keeper, his house being the nearest,

to ask for assistance. I saw no one near my father when I returned, andI have no idea how he came by his injuries. He was not a popular man,

being somewhat cold and forbidding in his manners; but he had, as faras I know, no active enemies. I know nothing further of the matter.’



“The Coroner: Did your father make any statement to you before he died?



“Witness: He mumbled a few words, but I could only catch some allusionto a rat.



“The Coroner: What did you understand by that?



“Witness: It conveyed no meaning to me. I thought that he was delirious.



“The Coroner: What was the point upon which you and your father hadthis final quarrel?



“Witness: I should prefer not to answer.



“The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it.



“Witness: It is really impossible for me to tell you. I can assure youthat it has nothing to do with the sad tragedy which followed.



“The Coroner: That is for the court to decide. I need not point out toyou that your refusal to answer will prejudice your case considerablyin any future proceedings which may arise.



“Witness: I must still refuse.



“The Coroner: I understand that the cry of ‘Cooee’ was a common signalbetween you and your father?





“Witness: It was.



“The Coroner: How was it, then, that he uttered it before he saw you,

and before he even knew that you had returned from Bristol?



“Witness (with considerable confusion): I do not know.



“A Juryman: Did you see nothing which aroused your suspicions when youreturned on hearing the cry, and found your father fatally injured?



“Witness: Nothing definite.



“The Coroner: What do you mean?



“Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into the open,

that I could think of nothing except of my father. Yet I have a vagueimpression that as I ran forward something lay upon the ground to theleft of me. It seemed to me to be something gray in color, a coat ofsome sort, or a plaid perhaps. When I rose from my father I lookedround for it, but it was gone.



“‘Do you mean that it disappeared before you went for help?’



“‘Yes, it was gone.’



“‘You cannot say what it was?’



“‘No, I had a feeling something was there.’



“‘How far from the body?’



“‘A dozen yards or so.’



“‘And how far from the edge of the wood?’



“‘About the same.’



“‘Then if it was removed it was while you were within a dozen yards ofit?’



“‘Yes, but with my back towards it.’



“This concluded the examination of the witness.”



“I see,” said I, as I glanced down the column, “that the coroner inhis concluding remarks was rather severe upon young McCarthy. He callsattention, and with reason, to the discrepancy about his father havingsignalled to him before seeing him, also to his refusal to give detailsof his conversation with his father, and his singular account of hisfather’s dying words. They are all, as he remarks, very much againstthe son.”



Holmes laughed softly to himself, and stretched himself out upon thecushioned seat. “Both you and the coroner have been at some pains,”said he, “to single out the very strongest points in the young man’sfavor. Don’t you see that you alternately give him credit for havingtoo much imagination and too little. Too little, if he could not inventa cause of quarrel which would give him the sympathy of the jury;too much, if he evolved from his own inner consciousness anythingso outré as a dying reference to a rat, and the incident of thevanishing cloth. No, sir, I shall approach this case from the point ofview that what this young man says is true, and we shall see whitherthat hypothesis will lead us. And now here is my pocket Petrarch, andnot another word shall I say of this case until we are on the scene ofaction. We lunch at Swindon, and I see that we shall be there in twentyminutes.”



It was nearly four o’clock when we at last, after passing throughthe beautiful Stroud Valley, and over the broad gleaming Severn,

found ourselves at the pretty little country-town of Ross. A lean,

ferret-like man, furtive and sly-looking, was waiting for us upon theplatform. In spite of the light brown dustcoat and leather-leggingswhich he wore in deference to his rustic surroundings, I had nodifficulty in recognizing Lestrade, of Scotland Yard. With him we droveto the Hereford Arms, where a room had already been engaged for us.



“I have ordered a carriage,” said Lestrade, as we sat over a cup oftea. “I knew your energetic nature, and that you would not be happyuntil you had been on the scene of the crime.”



“It was very nice and complimentary of you,” Holmes answered. “It isentirely a question of barometric pressure.”



Lestrade looked startled. “I do not quite follow,” he said.





“How is the glass? Twenty-nine, I see. No wind, and not a cloud in thesky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need smoking, and thesofa is very much superior to the usual country hotel abomination. I donot think that it is probable that I shall use the carriage to-night.”



Lestrade laughed indulgently. “You have, no doubt, already formed yourconclusions from the newspapers,” he said. “The case is as plain as apikestaff, and the more one goes into it the plainer it becomes. Still,

of course, one can’t refuse a lady, and such a very positive one, too.

She had heard of you, and would have your opinion, though I repeatedlytold her that there was nothing which you could do which I had notalready done. Why, bless my soul! here is her carriage at the door.”



He had hardly spoken before there rushed into the room one of the mostlovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her violet eyesshining, her lips parted, a pink flush upon her cheeks, all thought ofher natural reserve lost in her overpowering excitement and concern.



“Oh, Mr. Sherlock Holmes!” she cried, glancing from one to the otherof us, and finally, with a woman’s quick intuition, fastening upon mycompanion, “I am so glad that you have come. I have driven down to tellyou so. I know that James didn’t do it. I know it, and I want you tostart upon your work knowing it, too. Never let yourself doubt uponthat point. We have known each other since we were little children, andI know his faults as no one else does; but he is too tender-hearted tohurt a fly. Such a charge is absurd to any one who really knows him.”



“I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner,” said Sherlock Holmes. “You mayrely upon my doing all that I can.”



“But you have read the evidence. You have formed some conclusion? Doyou not see some loophole, some flaw? Do you not yourself think that heis innocent?”



“I think that it is very probable.”



“There, now!” she cried, throwing back her head, and looking defiantlyat Lestrade. “You hear! He gives me hopes.”



Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. “I am afraid that my colleague hasbeen a little quick in forming his conclusions,” he said.



“But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did it. Andabout his quarrel with his father, I am sure that the reason why hewould not speak about it to the coroner was because I was concerned init.”



“In what way?” asked Holmes.



“It is no time for me to hide anything. James and his father had manydisagreements about me. Mr. McCarthy was very anxious that there shouldbe a marriage between us. James and I have always loved each other asbrother and

sister; but of course he is young, and has seen very littleof life yet, and—and—well, he naturally did not wish to do anythinglike that yet. So there were quarrels, and this, I am sure, was one ofthem.”



“And your father?” asked Holmes. “Was he in favor of such a union?”



“No, he was averse to it also. No one but Mr. McCarthy was in favor ofit.” A quick blush passed over her fresh young face as Holmes shot oneof his keen, questioning glances at her.



“Thank you for this information,” said he. “May I see your father if Icall to-morrow?”



“I am afraid the doctor won’t allow it.”



“The doctor?”



“Yes, have you not heard? Poor father has never been strong for yearsback, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken to his bed,

and Dr. Willows says that he is a wreck, and that his nervous system isshattered. Mr. McCarthy was the only man alive who had known dad in theold days in Victoria.”



“Ha! In Victoria! That is important.”



“Yes, at the mines.”









“Quite so; at the gold-mines, where, as I understand, Mr. Turner madehis money.”



“Yes, certainly.”



“Thank you, Miss Turner. You have been of material assistance to me.”



“You will tell me if you have any news to-morrow. No doubt you will goto the prison to see James. Oh, if you do, Mr. Holmes, do tell him thatI know him to be innocent.”



“I will, Miss Turner.”



“I must go home now, for dad is very ill, and he misses me so if Ileave him. Good-bye, and God help you in your undertaking.” She hurriedfrom the room as impulsively as she had entered, and we heard thewheels of her carriage rattle off down the street.



“I am ashamed of you, Holmes,” said Lestrade, with dignity, after a fewminutes’ silence. “Why should you raise up hopes which you are bound todisappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I call it cruel.”



“I think that I see my way to clearing James McCarthy,” said Holmes.

“Have you an order to see him in prison?”



“Yes, but only for you and me.”



“Then I shall reconsider my resolution about going out. We have stilltime to take a train to Hereford and see him to-night?”



“Ample.”



“Then let us do so. Watson, I fear that you will find it very slow, butI shall only be away a couple of hours.”



I walked down to the station with them, and then wandered through thestreets of the little town, finally returning to the hotel, where Ilay upon the sofa and tried to interest myself in a yellow-backednovel. The puny plot of the story was so thin, however, when comparedto the deep mystery through which we were groping, and I found myattention wander so continually from the fiction to the fact, that Iat last flung it across the room, and gave myself up entirely to aconsideration of the events of the day. Supposing that this unhappyyoung man’s story was absolutely true, then what hellish thing, whatabsolutely unforeseen and extraordinary calamity could have occurredbetween the time when he parted from his father, and the moment when,

drawn back by his screams, he rushed into the glade? It was somethingterrible and deadly. What could it be? Might not the nature of theinjuries reveal something to my medical instincts? I rang the bell,

and called for the weekly county paper, which contained a verbatimaccount of the inquest. In the surgeon’s deposition it was stated thatthe posterior third of the left parietal bone and the left half of theoccipital bone had been shattered by a heavy blow from a blunt weapon.

I marked the spot upon my own head. Clearly such a blow must have beenstruck from behind. That was to some extent in favor of the accused,

as when seen quarrelling he was face to face with his father. Still,

it did not go for very much, for the older man might have turned hisback before the blow fell. Still, it might be worth while to callHolmes’s attention to it. Then there was the peculiar dying referenceto a rat. What could that mean? It could not be delirium. A man dyingfrom a sudden blow does not commonly become delirious. No, it was morelikely to be an attempt to explain how he met his fate. But what couldit indicate? I cudgelled my brains to find some possible explanation.

And then the incident of the gray cloth, seen by young McCarthy. Ifthat were true, the murderer must have dropped some part of his dress,

presumably his overcoat, in his flight, and must have had the hardihoodto return and to carry it away at the instant when the son was kneelingwith his back turned not a dozen paces off. What a tissue of mysteriesand improbabilities the whole thing was! I did not wonder at Lestrade’sopinion, and yet I had so much faith in Sherlock Holmes’s insight thatI could not lose hope as long as every fresh fact seemed to strengthenhis conviction of young McCarthy’s innocence.



It was late before Sherlock Holmes returned. He came back alone, forLestrade was staying in lodgings in the town.





“The glass still keeps very high,” he remarked, as he sat down. “It isof importance that it should not rain before we are able to go over theground. On the other hand, a man should be at his very best and keenestfor such nice work as that, and I did not wish to do it when fagged bya long journey. I have seen young McCarthy.”



“And what did you learn from him?”



“Nothing.”



“Could he throw no light?”



“None at all. I was inclined to think at one time that he knew who haddone it, and was screening him or her, but I am convinced now that heis as puzzled as every one else. He is not a very quick-witted youth,

though comely to look at, and, I should think, sound at heart.”



“I cannot admire his taste,” I remarked, “if it is indeed a fact thathe was averse to a marriage with so charming a young lady as this MissTurner.”



“Ah, thereby hangs a rather painful tale. This fellow is madly,

insanely in love with her, but some two years ago, when he was only alad, and before he really knew her, for she had been away five years ata boarding-school, what does the idiot do but get into the clutches ofa barmaid in Bristol, and marry her at a registry office? No one knowsa word of the matter, but you can imagine how maddening it must be tohim to be upbraided for not doing what he would give his very eyes todo, but what he knows to be absolutely impossible. It was sheer frenzyof this sort which made him throw his hands up into the air when hisfather, at their last interview, was goading him on to propose to MissTurner. On the other hand, he had no means of supporting himself, andhis father, who was by all accounts a very hard man, would have thrownhim over utterly had he known the truth. It was with his barmaid wifethat he had spent the last three days in Bristol, and his father didnot know where he was. Mark that point. It is of importance. Good hascome out of evil, however, for the barmaid, finding from the papersthat he is in serious trouble, and likely to be hanged, has thrownhim over utterly, and has written to him to say that she has a husbandalready in the Bermuda Dockyard, so that there is really no tie betweenthem. I think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for allthat he has suffered.”



“But if he is innocent, who has done it?”



“Ah! who? I would call your attention very particularly to two points.

One is that the murdered man had an appointment with some one at thePool, and that the some one could not have been his son, for his sonwas away, and he did not know when he would return. The second is thatthe murdered man was heard to cry ‘Cooee!’ before he knew that his sonhad returned. Those are the crucial points upon which the case depends.

And now let us talk about George Meredith, if you please, and we shallleave all minor matters until to-morrow.”



There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning brokebright and cloudless. At nine o’clock Lestrade called for us with thecarriage, and we set off for Hatherley Farm and the Boscombe Pool.



“There is serious news this morning,” Lestrade observed. “It is saidthat Mr. Turner, of the Hall, is so ill that his life is despaired of.”



“An elderly man, I presume?” said Holmes.



“About sixty; but his constitution has been shattered by his lifeabroad, and he has been in failing health for some time. This businesshas had a very bad effect upon him. He was an old friend of McCarthy’s,

and, I may add, a great benefactor to him, for I have learned that hegave him Hatherley Farm rent free.”



“Indeed! That is interesting,” said Holmes.



“Oh yes! In a hundred other ways he has helped him. Everybody abouthere speaks of his kindness to him.”



“Really! Does it not strike you as a little singular that thisMcCarthy, who appears to have had little of his own, and to have beenunder such obligations to Turner, should still talk of marrying hisson to Turner’s daughter, who is, presumably, heiress to the estate,

and that in such a very cocksure manner, as if it were merely a case ofa proposal and all else would follow? It is the more strange, since weknow that Turner himself was averse to the idea. The daughter told usas much. Do you not deduce something from that?”



“We have got to the deductions and the inferences,” said Lestrade,

winking at me. “I find it hard enough to tackle facts, Holmes, withoutflying away after theories and fancies.”



“You are right,” said Holmes, demurely; “you do find it very hard totackle the facts.”



“Anyhow, I have grasped one fact which you seem to find it difficult toget hold of,” replied Lestrade, with some warmth.



“And that is—”



“That McCarthy, senior, met his death from McCarthy, junior, and thatall theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine.”



“Well, moonshine is a brighter thing than fog,” said Holmes, laughing.

“But I am very much mistaken if this is not Hatherley Farm upon theleft.”



“Yes, that is it.” It was a wide-spread, comfortable-looking building,

two-storied, slate roofed, with great yellow blotches of lichen uponthe gray walls. The drawn blinds and the smokeless chimneys, however,

gave it a stricken look, as though the weight of this horror stilllay heavy upon it. We called at the door, when the maid, at Holmes’srequest, showed us the boots which her master wore at the time of hisdeath, and also a pair of the son’s, though not the pair which he hadthen had. Having measured these very carefully from seven or eightdifferent points, Holmes desired to be led to the court-yard, fromwhich we all followed the winding track which led to Boscombe Pool.







“THE MAID SHOWED US THE BOOTS.”













Sherlock Holmes was transformed when he was hot upon such a scentas this. Men who had only known the quiet thinker and logician ofBaker Street would have failed to recognize him. His face flushed anddarkened. His brows were drawn into two hard, black lines, while hiseyes shone out from beneath them with a steely glitter. His face wasbent downward, his shoulders bowed, his lips compressed, and the veinsstood out like whip-cord in his long, sinewy neck. His nostrils seemedto dilate with a purely animal lust for the chase, and his mind was soabsolutely concentrated upon the matter before him, that a questionor remark fell unheeded upon his ears, or, at the most, only provokeda quick, impatient snarl in reply. Swiftly and silently he made hisway along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way ofthe woods to the Boscombe Pool. It was damp, marshy ground, as is allthat district, and there were marks of many feet, both upon the pathand amid the short grass which bounded it on either side. SometimesHolmes would hurry on, sometimes stop dead, and once he made quite alittle détour into the meadow. Lestrade and I walked behind him, thedetective indifferent and contemptuous, while I watched my friend withthe interest which sprang from the conviction that every one of hisactions was directed towards a definite end.



The Boscombe Pool, which is a little reed-girt sheet of water somefifty yards across, is situated at the boundary between the HatherleyFarm and the private park of the wealthy Mr. Turner. Above the woodswhich lined it upon the farther side we could see the red, juttingpinnacles which marked the site of the rich land-owner’s dwelling. Onthe Hatherley side of the Pool the woods grew very thick, and there wasa narrow belt of sodden grass twenty paces across between the edge ofthe trees and the reeds which lined the lake. Lestrade showed us theexact spot at which the body had been found, and, indeed, so moist wasthe ground, that I could plainly see the traces which had been left bythe fall of the stricken man. To Holmes, as I could see by his eagerface and peering eyes, very many other things were to be read upon thetrampled grass. He ran round, like a dog who is picking up a scent, andthen turned upon my companion.





“What did you go into the Pool for?” he asked.



“I fished about with a rake. I thought there might be some weapon orother trace. But how on earth—”



“Oh, tut, tut! I have no time! That left foot of yours with its inwardtwist is all over the place. A mole could trace it, and there itvanishes among the reeds. Oh, how simple it would all have been had Ibeen here before they came like a herd of buffalo, and wallowed allover it. Here is where the party with the lodge-keeper came, and theyhave covered all tracks for six or eight feet round the body. Buthere are three separate tracks of the same feet.” He drew out a lens,

and lay down upon his waterproof to have a better view, talking allthe time rather to himself than to us. “These are young McCarthy’sfeet. Twice he was walking, and once he ran swiftly so that the solesare deeply marked, and the heels hardly visible. That bears out hisstory. He ran when he saw his father on the ground. Then here are thefather’s feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It is thebutt-end of the gun as the son stood listening. And this? Ha, ha! Whathave we here? Tiptoes! tiptoes! Square, too, quite unusual boots! Theycome, they go, they come again—of course that was for the cloak.

Now where did they come from?” He ran up and down, sometimes losing,

sometimes finding the track until we were well within the edge of thewood, and under the shadow of a great beech, the largest tree in theneighborhood. Holmes traced his way to the farther side of this, andlay down once more upon his face with a little cry of satisfaction.

For a long time he remained there, turning over the leaves and driedsticks, gathering up what seemed to me to be dust into an envelope, andexamining with his lens not only the ground, but even the bark of thetree as far as he could reach. A jagged stone was lying among the moss,

and this also he carefully examined and retained. Then he followed apathway through the wood until he came to the high-road, where alltraces were lost.



“It has been a case of considerable interest,” he remarked, returningto his natural manner. “I fancy that this gray house on the right mustbe the lodge. I think that I will go in and have a word with Moran, andperhaps write a little note. Having done that, we may drive back to ourluncheon. You may walk to the cab, and I shall be with you presently.”



It was about ten minutes before we regained our cab, and drove backinto Ross, Holmes still carrying with him the stone which he had pickedup in the wood.



“This may interest you, Lestrade,” he remarked, holding it out. “Themurder was done with it.”



“I see no marks.”



“There are none.”



“How do you know, then?”



“The grass was growing under it. It had only lain there a few days.

There was no sign of a place whence it had been taken. It correspondswith the injuries. There is no sign of any other weapon.”



“And the murderer?”



“Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wearsthick-soled shooting-boots and a gray cloak, smokes Indian cigars, usesa cigar-holder, and carries a blunt penknife in his pocket. There areseveral other indications, but these may be enough to aid us in oursearch.”



Lestrade laughed. “I am afraid that I am still a sceptic,” he said.

“Theories are all very well, but we have to deal with a hard-headedBritish jury.”



“Nous verrons,” answered Holmes, calmly. “You work your own method,

and I shall work mine. I shall be busy this afternoon, and shallprobably return to London by the evening train.”



“And leave your case unfinished?”



“No, finished.”



“But the mystery?”



“It is solved.”



“Who was the criminal, then?”



“The gentleman I describe.”





“But who is he?”



“Surely it would not be difficult to find out. This is not such apopulous neighborhood.”



Lestrade shrugged his shoulders. “I am a practical man,” he said,

“and I really cannot undertake to go about the country lookingfor a left-handed gentleman with a game-leg. I should become thelaughing-stock of Scotland Yard.”



“All right,” said Holmes, quietly. “I have given you the chance. Hereare your lodgings. Good-bye. I shall drop you a line before I leave.”



Having left Lestrade at his rooms, we drove to our hotel, where wefound lunch upon the table. Holmes was silent and buried in thoughtwith a pained expression upon his face, as one who finds himself in aperplexing position.



“Look here, Watson,” he said, when the cloth was cleared; “just sitdown in this chair and let me preach to you for a little. I don’t quiteknow what to do, and I should value your advice. Light a cigar, and letme expound.”



“Pray do so.”



“Well, now, in considering this case there are two points about youngMcCarthy’s narrative which struck us both instantly, although theyimpressed me in his favor and you against him. One was the fact thathis father should, according to his account, cry ‘Cooee!’ before seeinghim. The other was his singular dying reference to a rat. He mumbledseveral words, you understand, but that was all that caught the son’sear. Now from this double point our research must commence, and we willbegin it by presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true.”



“What of this ‘Cooee!’ then?”



“Well, obviously it could not have been meant for the son. The son, asfar as he knew, was in Bristol. It was mere chance that he was withinear-shot. The ‘Cooee!’ was meant to attract the attention of whoeverit was that he had the appointment with. But ‘Cooee’ is a distinctlyAustralian cry, and one which is used between Australians. There is astrong presumption that the person whom McCarthy expected to meet himat Boscombe Pool was some one who had been in Australia.”



“What of the rat, then?”



Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened itout on the table. “This is a map of the Colony of Victoria,” he said.

“I wired to Bristol for it last night.” He put his hand over part ofthe map. “What do you read?” he asked.



“ARAT,” I read.



“And now?” He raised his hand.



“BALLARAT.”



“Quite so. That was the word the man uttered, and of which his son onlycaught the last two syllables. He was trying to utter the name of hismurderer. So-and-so, of Ballarat.”



“It is wonderful!” I exclaimed.



“It is obvious. And now, you see, I had narrowed the field downconsiderably. The possession of a gray garment was a third pointwhich, granting the son’s statement to be correct, was a certainty. Wehave come now out of mere vagueness to the definite conception of anAustralian from Ballarat with a gray cloak.”



“Certainly.”



“And one who was at home in the district, for the Pool can only beapproached by the farm or by the estate, where strangers could hardlywander.”



“Quite so.”



“Then comes our expedition of to-day. By an examination of the ground Igained the trifling details which I gave to that imbecile Lestrade, asto the personality of the criminal.”



“But how did you gain them?”



“You know my method. It is founded upon the observance of trifles.”



“His height I know that you might roughly judge from the length of hisstride. His boots, too, might be told from their traces.”





“Yes, they were peculiar boots.”



“But his lameness?”



“The impression of his right foot was always less distinct than hisleft. He put less weight upon it. Why? Because he limped—he was lame.”



“But his left-handedness.”



“You were yourself struck by the nature of the injury as recordedby the surgeon at the inquest. The blow was struck from immediatelybehind, and yet was upon the left side. Now, how can that be unless itwere by a left-handed man? He had stood behind that tree during theinterview between the father and son. He had even smoked there. I foundthe ash of a cigar, which my special knowledge of tobacco ashes enabledme to pronounce as an Indian cigar. I have, as you know, devoted someattention to this, and written a little monograph on the ashes of 140different varieties of pipe, cigar, and cigarette tobacco. Having foundthe ash, I then looked round and discovered the stump among the mosswhere he had tossed it. It was an Indian cigar, of the variety whichare rolled in Rotterdam.”



“And the cigar-holder?”



“I could see that the end had not been in his mouth. Therefore he useda holder. The tip had been cut off, not bitten off, but the cut was nota clean one, so I deduced a blunt pen-knife.”



“Holmes,” I said, “you have drawn a net round this man from which hecannot escape, and you have saved an innocent human life as truly asif you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the direction inwhich all this points. The culprit is—”



“Mr. John Turner,” cried the hotel waiter, opening the door of oursitting-room, and ushering in a visitor.



The man who entered was a strange and impressive figure. His slow,

limping step and bowed shoulders gave the appearance of decrepitude,

and yet his hard, deep-lined, craggy features, and his enormouslimbs showed that he was possessed of unusual strength of body andof character. His tangled beard, grizzled hair, and outstanding,

drooping eyebrows combined to give an air of dignity and power to hisappearance, but his face was of an ashen white, while his lips and thecorners of his nostrils were tinged with a shade of blue. It was clearto me at a glance that he was in the grip of some deadly and chronicdisease.



“Pray sit down on the sofa,” said Holmes, gently. “You had my note?”



“Yes, the lodge-keeper brought it up. You said that you wished to seeme here to avoid scandal.”



“I thought people would talk if I went to the Hall.”



“And why did you wish to see me?” He looked across at my companion withdespair in his weary eyes, as though his question was already answered.



“Yes,” said Holmes, answering the look rather than the words. “It isso. I know all about McCarthy.”



The old man sank his face in his hands. “God help me!” he cried. “But Iwould not have let the young man come to harm. I give you my word thatI would have spoken out if it went against him at the Assizes.”



“I am glad to hear you say so,” said Holmes, gravely.



“I would have spoken now had it not been for my dear girl. It wouldbreak her heart—it will break her heart when she hears that I amarrested.”



“It may not come to that,” said Holmes.



“What!”



“I am no official agent. I understand that it was your daughter whorequired my presence here, and I am acting in her interests. YoungMcCarthy must be got off, however.”



“I am a dying man,” said old Turner. “I have had diabetes for years. Mydoctor says it is a question whether I shall live a month. Yet I wouldrather die under my own roof than in a jail.”



Holmes rose and sat down at the table with his pen in his hand and abundle of paper before him. “Just tell us the truth,” he said. “Ishall jot down the facts. You will sign it, and Watson here can witnessit. Then I could produce your confession at the last extremity to saveyoung McCarthy. I promise you that I shall not use it unless it isabsolutely needed.”



“It’s as well,” said the old man; “it’s a question whether I shall liveto the Assizes, so it matters little to me, but I should wish to spareAlice the shock. And now I will make the thing clear to you; it hasbeen a long time in the acting, but will not take me long to tell.



“You didn’t know this dead man, McCarthy. He was a devil incarnate. Itell you that. God keep you out of the clutches of such a man as he.

His grip has been upon me these twenty years, and he has blasted mylife. I’ll tell you first how I came to be in his power.



“It was in the early sixties at the diggings. I was a young chap then,

hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at anything; I gotamong bad companions, took to drink, had no luck with my claim, took tothe bush, and in a word became what you would call over here a highwayrobber. There were six of us, and we had a wild, free life of it,

sticking up a station from time to time, or stopping the wagons on theroad to the diggings. Black Jack of Ballarat was the name I went under,

and our party is still remembered in the colony as the Ballarat Gang.



“One day a gold convoy came down from Ballarat to Melbourne, and welay in wait for it and attacked it. There were six troopers and six ofus, so it was a close thing, but we emptied four of their saddles atthe first volley. Three of our boys were killed, however, before wegot the swag. I put my pistol to the head of the wagon-driver, who wasthis very man McCarthy. I wish to the Lord that I had shot him then,

but I spared him, though I saw his wicked little eyes fixed on my face,

as though to remember every feature. We got away with the gold, becamewealthy men, and made our way over to England without being suspected.

There I parted from my old pals, and determined to settle down to aquiet and respectable life. I bought this estate, which chanced to bein the market, and I set myself to do a little good with my money,

to make up for the way in which I had earned it. I married, too, andthough my wife died young, she left me my dear little Alice. Even whenshe was just a baby her wee hand seemed to lead me down the right pathas nothing else had ever done. In a word, I turned over a new leaf, anddid my best to make up for the past. All was going well when McCarthylaid his grip upon me.



“I had gone up to town about an investment, and I met him in RegentStreet with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his foot.



“‘Here we are, Jack,’ says he, touching me on the arm; ‘we’ll be asgood as a family to you. There’s two of us, me and my son, and you canhave the keeping of us. If you don’t—it’s a fine, law-abiding countryis England, and there’s always a policeman within hail.’



“Well, down they came to the West country, there was no shaking themoff, and there they have lived rent free on my best land ever since.

There was no rest for me, no peace, no forgetfulness; turn where Iwould, there was his cunning, grinning face at my elbow. It grew worseas Alice grew up, for he soon saw I was more afraid of her knowing mypast than of the police. Whatever he wanted he must have, and whateverit was I gave him without question, land, money, houses, until at lasthe asked a thing which I could not give. He asked for Alice.



“His son, you see, had grown up, and so had my girl, and as I was knownto be in weak health, it seemed a fine stroke to him that his ladshould step into the whole property. But there I was firm. I would nothave his cursed stock mixed with mine; not that I had any dislike tothe lad, but his blood was in him, and that was enough. I stood firm.

McCarthy threatened. I braved him to do his worst. We were to meet atthe Pool midway between our houses to talk it over.





“When I went down there I found him talking with his son, so I smokeda cigar, and waited behind a tree until he should be alone. But as Ilistened to his talk all that was black and bitter in me seemed tocome uppermost. He was urging his son to marry my daughter with aslittle regard for what she might think as if she were a slut from offthe streets. It drove me mad to think that I and all that I held mostdear should be in the power of such a man as this. Could I not snap thebond? I was already a dying and a desperate man. Though clear of mindand fairly strong of limb, I knew that my own fate was sealed. But mymemory and my girl! Both could be saved, if I could but silence thatfoul tongue. I did it, Mr. Holmes. I would do it again. Deeply as Ihave sinned, I have led a life of martyrdom to atone for it. But thatmy girl should be entangled in the same meshes which held me was morethan I could suffer. I struck him down with no more compunction than ifhe had been some foul and venomous beast. His cry brought back his son;but I had gained the cover of the wood, though I was forced to go backto fetch the cloak which I had dropped in my flight. That is the truestory, gentlemen, of all that occurred.”



“Well, it is not for me to judge you,” said Holmes, as the old mansigned the statement which had been drawn out. “I pray that we maynever be exposed to such a temptation.”



“I pray not, sir. And what do you intend to do?”



“In view of your health, nothing. You are yourself aware that you willsoon have to answer for your deed at a higher court than the Assizes.

I will keep your confession, and, if McCarthy is condemned, I shall beforced to use it. If not, it shall never be seen by mortal eye; andyour secret, whether you be alive or dead, shall be safe with us.”



“Farewell, then,” said the old man, solemnly. “Your own death-beds,

when they come, will be the easier for the thought of the peace whichyou have given to mine.” Tottering and shaking in all his giant frame,

he stumbled slowly from the room.





“God help us!” said Holmes, after a long silence. “Why does fate playsuch tricks with poor, helpless worms? I never hear of such a case asthis that I do not think of Baxter’s words, and say, ‘There, but forthe grace of God, goes Sherlock Holmes.’”



James McCarthy was acquitted at the Assizes, on the strength of anumber of objections which had been drawn out by Holmes, and submittedto the defending counsel. Old Turner lived for seven months after ourinterview, but he is now dead; and there is every prospect that the sonand daughter may come to live happily together, in ignorance of theblack cloud which rests upon their past.







Adventure VTHE FIVE ORANGE PIPS











WHEN I glance over my notes and records of the Sherlock Holmes casesbetween the years ’82 and ’90, I am faced by so many which presentstrange and interesting features that it is no easy matter to knowwhich to choose and which to leave. Some, however, have already gainedpublicity through the papers, and others have not offered a fieldfor those peculiar qualities which my friend possessed in so high adegree, and which it is the object of these papers to illustrate. Some,

too, have baffled his analytical skill, and would be, as narratives,

beginnings without an ending, while others have been but partiallycleared up, and have their explanations founded rather upon conjectureand surmise than on that absolute logical proof which was so dear tohim. There is, however, one of these last which was so remarkable inits details and so startling in its results that I am tempted to givesome account of it, in spite of the fact that there are points inconnection with it which never have been, and probably never will be,

entirely cleared up.







The year ’87 furnished us with a long series of cases of greateror less interest, of which I retain the records. Among my headingsunder this one twelve months I find an account of the adventure ofthe Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant Society, who held aluxurious club in the lower vault of a furniture warehouse, of thefacts connected with the loss of the British bark Sophy Anderson, ofthe singular adventures of the Grice Patersons in the island of Uffa,

and finally of the Camberwell poisoning case. In the latter, as maybe remembered, Sherlock Holmes was able, by winding up the dead man’swatch, to prove that it had been wound up two hours before, and thattherefore the deceased had gone to bed within that time—a deductionwhich was of the greatest importance in clearing up the case. All theseI may sketch out at some future date, but none of them present suchsingular features as the strange train of circumstances which I havenow taken up my pen to describe.







It was in the latter days of September, and the equinoctial gales hadset in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had screamed and therain had beaten against the windows, so that even here in the heartof great, hand-made London we were forced to raise our minds for theinstant from the routine of life, and to recognize the presence ofthose great elemental forces which shriek at mankind through the barsof his civilization, like untamed beasts in a cage. As evening drew in,

the storm grew higher and louder, and the wind cried and sobbed like achild in the chimney. Sherlock Holmes sat moodily at one side of thefireplace cross-indexing his records of crime, while I at the other wasdeep in one of Clark Russell’s fine sea-stories, until the howl of thegale from without seemed to blend with the text, and the splash of therain to lengthen out into the long swash of the sea waves. My wife wason a visit to her mother’s, and for a few days I was a dweller oncemore in my old quarters at Baker Street.



“Why,” said I, glancing up at my companion, “that was surely the bell.

Who could come to-night? Some friend of yours, perhaps?”



“Except yourself I have none,” he answered. “I do not encouragevisitors.”



“A client, then?”



“If so, it is a serious case. Nothing less would bring a man out onsuch a day and at such an hour. But I take it that it is more likely tobe some crony of the landlady’s.”



Sherlock Holmes was wrong in his conjecture, however, for there camea step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He stretched out hislong arm to turn the lamp away from himself and towards the vacantchair upon which a new-comer must sit. “Come in!” said he.



The man who entered was young, some two-and-twenty at the outside,

well-groomed and trimly clad, with something of refinement and delicacyin his bearing. The steaming umbrella which he held in his hand, andhis long shining waterproof told of the fierce weather through which hehad come. He looked about him anxiously in the glare of the lamp, andI could see that his face was pale and his eyes heavy, like those of aman who is weighed down with some great anxiety.



“I owe you an apology,” he said, raising his golden pince-nez to hiseyes. “I trust that I am not intruding. I fear that I have brought sometraces of the storm and rain into your snug chamber.”



“Give me your coat and umbrella,” said Holmes. “They may rest hereon the hook, and will be dry presently. You have come up from thesouth-west, I see.”



“Yes, from Horsham.”



“That clay and chalk mixture which I see upon your toe-caps is quitedistinctive.”



“I have come for advice.”



“That is easily got.”



“And help.”



“That is not always so easy.”



“I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I heard from Major Prendergast howyou saved him in the Tankerville Club Scandal.”



“Ah, of course. He was wrongfully accused of cheating at cards.”



“He said that you could solve anything.”



“He said too much.”



“That you are never beaten.”



“I have been beaten four times—three times by men, and once by awoman.”





“But what is that compared with the number of your successes?”



“It is true that I have been generally successful.”



“Then you may be so with me.”



“I beg that you will draw your chair up to the fire, and favor me withsome details as to your case.”



“It is no ordinary one.”



“None of those which come to me are. I am the last court of appeal.”



“And yet I question, sir, whether, in all your experience, you haveever listened to a more mysterious and inexplicable chain of eventsthan those which have happened in my own family.”



“You fill me with interest,” said Holmes. “Pray give us the essentialfacts from the commencement, and I can afterwards question you as tothose details which seem to me to be most important.”



The young man pulled his chair up, and pushed his wet feet out towardsthe blaze.



“My name,” said he, “is John Openshaw, but my own affairs have, as faras I can understand it, little to do with this awful business. It is anhereditary matter; so in order to give you an idea of the facts, I mustgo back to the commencement of the affair.



“You must know that my grandfather had two sons—my uncle Elias andmy father Joseph. My father had a small factory at Coventry, whichhe enlarged at the time of the invention of bicycling. He was thepatentee of the Openshaw unbreakable tire, and his business met withsuch success that he was able to sell it, and to retire upon a handsomecompetence.



“My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man, andbecame a planter in Florida, where he was reported to have donevery well. At the time of the war he fought in Jackson’s army, andafterwards under Hood, where he rose to be a colonel. When Lee laiddown his arms my uncle returned to his plantation, where he remainedfor three or four years. About 1869 or 1870 he came back to Europe,

and took a small estate in Sussex, near Horsham. He had made a veryconsiderable fortune in the States, and his reason for leaving them washis aversion to the negroes, and his dislike of the Republican policyin extending the franchise to them. He was a singular man, fierce andquick-tempered, very foul-mouthed when he was angry, and of a mostretiring disposition. During all the years that he lived at Horsham Idoubt if ever he set foot in the town. He had a garden and two or threefields round his house, and there he would take his exercise, thoughvery often for weeks on end he would never leave his room. He dranka great deal of brandy, and smoked very heavily, but he would see nosociety, and did not want any friends, not even his own brother.



“He didn’t mind me, in fact, he took a fancy to me, for at the timewhen he saw me first I was a youngster of twelve or so. This would bein the year 1878, after he had been eight or nine years in England. Hebegged my father to let me live with him, and he was very kind to mein his way. When he was sober he used to be fond of playing backgammonand draughts with me, and he would make me his representative both withthe servants and with the tradespeople, so that by the time that I wassixteen I was quite master of the house. I kept all the keys, and couldgo where I liked and do what I liked, so long as I did not disturb himin his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he hada single room, a lumber-room up among the attics, which was invariablylocked, and which he would never permit either me or anyone else toenter. With a boy’s curiosity I have peeped through the key-hole, butI was never able to see more than such a collection of old trunks andbundles as would be expected in such a room.



“One day—it was in March, 1883—a letter with a foreign stamp layupon the table in front of the Colonel’s plate. It was not a commonthing for him to receive letters, for his bills were all paid inready money, and he had no friends of any sort. ‘From India!’ said he,

as he took it up, ‘Pondicherry postmark! What can this be?’ Openingit hurriedly, out there jumped five little dried orange pips, whichpattered down upon his plate. I began to laugh at this, but the laughwas struck from my lips at the sight of his face. His lip had fallen,

his eyes were protruding, his skin the color of putty, and he glared atthe envelope which he still held in his trembling hand. ‘K. K. K.!’ heshrieked, and then, ‘My God, my God, my sins have overtaken me!’



“‘What is it, uncle?’ I cried.



“‘Death,’ said he, and rising from the table he retired to his room,

leaving me palpitating with horror. I took up the envelope, and sawscrawled in red ink upon the inner flap, just above the gum, the letterK three times repeated. There was nothing else save the five driedpips. What could be the reason of his overpowering terror? I left thebreakfast-table, and as I ascended the stair I met him coming down withan old rusty key, which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand,

and a small brass box, like a cash-box, in the other.



“‘They may do what they like, but I’ll checkmate them still,’ said he,

with an oath. ‘Tell Mary that I shall want a fire in my room to-day,

and send down to Fordham, the Horsham lawyer.’



“I did as he ordered, and when the lawyer arrived I was asked to stepup to the room. The fire was burning brightly, and in the grate therewas a mass of black, fluffy ashes, as of burned paper, while the brassbox stood open and empty beside it. As I glanced at the box I noticed,

with a start, that upon the lid were printed the treble K which I hadread in the morning upon the envelope.



“‘I wish you, John,’ said my uncle, ‘to witness my will. I leavemy estate, with all its advantages and all its disadvantages to mybrother, your father, whence it will, no doubt, descend to you. If youcan enjoy it in peace, well and good! If you find you cannot, take myadvice, my boy, and leave it to your deadliest enemy. I am sorry togive you such a two-edged thing, but I can’t say what turn things aregoing to take. Kindly sign the paper where Mr. Fordham shows you.’



“I signed the paper as directed, and the lawyer took it away with him.

The singular incident made, as you may think, the deepest impressionupon me, and I pondered over it, and turned it every way in my mindwithout being able to make anything of it. Yet I could not shake offthe vague feeling of dread which it left behind though the sensationgrew less keen as the weeks passed, and nothing happened to disturbthe usual routine of our lives. I could see a change in my uncle,

however. He drank more than ever, and he was less inclined for anysort of society. Most of his time he would spend in his room, with thedoor locked upon the inside, but sometimes he would emerge in a sortof drunken frenzy, and would burst out of the house and tear about thegarden with a revolver in his hand, screaming out that he was afraidof no man, and that he was not to be cooped up, like a sheep in a pen,

by man or devil. When these hot fits were over, however, he would rushtumultuously in at the door, and lock and bar it behind him, like a manwho can brazen it out no longer against the terror which lies at theroots of his soul. At such times I have seen his face, even on a coldday, glisten with moisture, as though it were new raised from a basin.



“Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to abuseyour patience, there came a night when he made one of those drunkensallies from which he never came back. We found him, when we went tosearch for him, face downward in a little green-scummed pool, which layat the foot of the garden. There was no sign of any violence, and thewater was but two feet deep, so that the jury, having regard to hisknown eccentricity, brought in a verdict of suicide. But I, who knewhow he winced from the very thought of death, had much ado to persuademyself that he had gone out of his way to meet it. The matter passed,

however, and my father entered into possession of the estate, and ofsome £14,000, which lay to his credit at the bank.”



“One moment,” Holmes interposed. “Your statement is, I foresee, oneof the most remarkable to which I have ever listened. Let me have thedate of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and the date of hissupposed suicide.”



“The latter arrived on March 10, 1883. His death was seven weeks later,

upon the night of May 2d.”



“Thank you. Pray proceed.”



“When my father took over the Horsham property, he, at my request, madea careful examination of the attic, which had been always locked up. Wefound the brass box there, although its contents had been destroyed. Onthe inside of the cover was a paper label, with the initials of K. K.

K. repeated upon it, and ‘Letters, memoranda, receipts, and a register’written beneath. These, we presume, indicated the nature of the paperswhich had been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there wasnothing of much importance in the attic, save a great many scatteredpapers and note-books bearing upon my uncle’s life in America. Someof them were of the war time, and showed that he had done his dutywell, and had borne the repute of a brave soldier. Others were of adate during the reconstruction of the Southern States, and were mostlyconcerned with politics, for he had evidently taken a strong part inopposing the carpet-bag politicians who had been sent down from theNorth.



“Well, it was the beginning of ’84 when my father came to live atHorsham, and all went as well as possible with us until the Januaryof ’85. On the fourth day after the new year I heard my father give asharp cry of surprise as we sat together at the breakfast-table. Therehe was, sitting with a newly-opened envelope in one hand and five driedorange pips in the outstretched palm of the other one. He had alwayslaughed at what he called my cock-and-a-bull story about the Colonel,

but he looked very scared and puzzled now that the same thing had comeupon himself.





“‘Why, what on earth does this mean, John?’ he stammered.



“My heart had turned to lead. ‘It is K. K. K.,’ said I.



“He looked inside the envelope. ‘So it is,’ he cried. ‘Here are thevery letters. But what is this written above them?’



“‘Put the papers on the sundial,’ I read, peeping over his shoulder.



“‘What papers? What sundial?’ he asked.



“‘The sundial in the garden. There is no other,’ said I; ‘but thepapers must be those that are destroyed.’



“‘Pooh!’ said he, gripping hard at his courage. ‘We are in a civilizedland here, and we can’t have tomfoolery of this kind. Where does thething come from?’



“‘From Dundee,’ I answered, glancing at the post-mark.



“‘Some preposterous practical joke,’ said he. ‘What have I to do withsundials and papers? I shall take no notice of such nonsense.’



“‘I should certainly speak to the police,’ I said.



“‘And be laughed at for my pains. Nothing of the sort.’



“‘Then let me do so?’



“‘No, I forbid you. I won’t have a fuss made about such nonsense.’



“It was in vain to argue with him, for he was a very obstinate man. Iwent about, however, with a heart which was full of forebodings.



“On the third day after the coming of the letter my father went fromhome to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is in commandof one of the forts upon Portsdown Hill. I was glad that he should go,

for it seemed to me that he was farther from danger when he was awayfrom home. In that, however, I was in error. Upon the second day of hisabsence I received a telegram from the Major, imploring me to come atonce. My father had fallen over one of the deep chalk-pits which aboundin the neighborhood, and was lying senseless, with a shattered skull. Ihurried to him, but he passed away without having ever recovered hisconsciousness. He had, as it appears, been returning from Fareham inthe twilight, and as the country was unknown to him, and the chalk-pitunfenced, the jury had no hesitation in bringing in a verdict of ‘Deathfrom accidental causes.’ Carefully as I examined every fact connectedwith his death, I was unable to find anything which could suggest theidea of murder. There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, norobbery, no record of strangers having been seen upon the roads. Andyet I need not tell you that my mind was far from at ease, and that Iwas wellnigh certain that some foul plot had been woven round him.



“In this sinister way I came into my inheritance. You will ask me whyI did not dispose of it? I answer, because I was well convinced thatour troubles were in some way dependent upon an incident in my uncle’slife, and that the danger would be as pressing in one house as inanother.



“It was in January, ’85, that my poor father met his end, and two yearsand eight months have elapsed since then. During that time I have livedhappily at Horsham, and I had begun to hope that this curse had passedaway from the family, and that it had ended with the last generation. Ihad begun to take comfort too soon, however; yesterday morning the blowfell in the very shape in which it had come upon my father.”



The young man took from his waistcoat a crumpled envelope, and, turningto the table, he shook out upon it five little dried orange pips.



“This is the envelope,” he continued. “The post-mark is London—easterndivision. Within are the very words which were upon my father’s lastmessage: ‘K. K. K.’; and then ‘Put the papers on the sundial.’”



“What have you done?” asked Holmes.



“Nothing.”



“Nothing?”



“To tell the truth”—he sank his face into his thin, white hands—“Ihave felt helpless. I have felt like one of those poor rabbits whenthe snake is writhing towards it. I seem to be in the grasp of someresistless, inexorable evil, which no foresight and no precautions canguard against.”



“Tut! tut!” cried Sherlock Holmes. “You must act, man, or you are lost.

Nothing but energy can save you. This is no time for despair.”



“I have seen the police.”



“Ah!”



“But they listened to my story with a smile. I am convinced that theinspector has formed the opinion that the letters are all practicaljokes, and that the deaths of my relations were really accidents, asthe jury stated, and were not to be connected with the warnings.”



Holmes shook his clenched hands in the air. “Incredible imbecility!” hecried.



“They have, however, allowed me a policeman, who may remain in thehouse with me.”



“Has he come with you to-night?”



“No. His orders were to stay in the house.”



Again Holmes raved in the air.



“Why did you come to me?” he said; “and, above all, why did you notcome at once?”



“I did not know. It was only to-day that I spoke to Major Prendergastabout my troubles, and was advised by him to come to you.”



“It is really two days since you had the letter. We should have actedbefore this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than that whichyou have placed before us—no suggestive detail which might help us?”



“There is one thing,” said John Openshaw. He rummaged in his coatpocket, and drawing out a piece of discolored, blue-tinted paper, helaid it out upon the table. “I have some remembrance,” said he, “thaton the day when my uncle burned the papers I observed that the small,

unburned margins which lay amid the ashes were of this particularcolor. I found this single sheet upon the floor of his room, and I aminclined to think that it may be one of the papers which has, perhaps,

fluttered out from among the others, and in that way have escapeddestruction. Beyond the mention of pips, I do not see that it helps usmuch. I think myself that it is a page from some private diary. Thewriting is undoubtedly my uncle’s.”



Holmes moved the lamp, and we both bent over the sheet of paper, whichshowed by its ragged edge that it had indeed been torn from a book. Itwas headed, “March, 1869,” and beneath were the following enigmaticalnotices:



“4th. Hudson came. Same old platform.



“7th. Set the pips on McCauley, Paramore, and John Swain, of St.

Augustine.



“9th. McCauley cleared.



“10th. John Swain cleared.



“12th. Visited Paramore. All well.”



“Thank you!” said Holmes, folding up the paper, and returning it toour visitor. “And now you must on no account lose another instant. Wecannot spare time even to discuss what you have told me. You must gethome instantly and act.”



“What shall I do?”



“There is but one thing to do. It must be done at once. You must putthis piece of paper which you have shown us into the brass box whichyou have described. You must also put in a note to say that all theother papers were burned by your uncle, and that this is the onlyone which remains. You must assert that in such words as will carryconviction with them. Having done this, you must at once put the boxout upon the sundial, as directed. Do you understand?”



“Entirely.”



“Do not think of revenge, or anything of the sort, at present. I thinkthat we may gain that by means of the law; but we have our web toweave, while theirs is already woven. The first consideration is toremove the pressing danger which threatens you. The second is to clearup the mystery and to punish the guilty parties.”



“I thank you,” said the young man, rising, and pulling on his overcoat.

“You have given me fresh life and hope. I shall certainly do as youadvise.”



“Do not lose an instant. And, above all, take care of yourself in themeanwhile, for I do not think that there can be a doubt that you arethreatened by a very real and imminent danger. How do you go back?”



“By train from Waterloo.”



“It is not yet nine. The streets will be crowded, so I trust that youmay be in safety. And yet you cannot guard yourself too closely.”



“I am armed.”



“That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case.”



“I shall see you at Horsham, then?”



“No, your secret lies in London. It is there that I shall seek it.”



“Then I shall call upon you in a day, or in two days, with news as tothe box and the papers. I shall take your advice in every particular.”He shook hands with us, and took his leave. Outside the wind stillscreamed, and the rain splashed and pattered against the windows.

This strange, wild story seemed to have come to us from amid the madelements—blown in upon us like a sheet of sea-weed in a gale—and nowto have been reabsorbed by them once more.



Sherlock Holmes sat for some time in silence, with his head sunkforward and his eyes bent upon the red glow of the fire. Then he lithis pipe, and leaning back in his chair he watched the blue smoke-ringsas they chased each other up to the ceiling.



“I think, Watson,” he remarked at last, “that of all our cases we havehad none more fantastic than this.”



“Save, perhaps, the Sign of Four.”



“Well, yes. Save, perhaps, that. And yet this John Openshaw seems tome to be walking amid even greater perils than did the Sholtos.”



“But have you,” I asked, “formed any definite conception as to whatthese perils are?”



“There can be no question as to their nature,” he answered.



“Then what are they? Who is this K. K. K., and why does he pursue thisunhappy family?”



Sherlock Holmes closed his eyes and placed his elbows upon the armsof his chair, with his finger-tips together. “The ideal reasoner,” heremarked, “would, when he had once been shown a single fact in allits bearings, deduce from it not only all the chain of events whichled up to it, but also all the results which would follow from it. AsCuvier could correctly describe a whole animal by the contemplation ofa single bone, so the observer who has thoroughly understood one linkin a series of incidents, should be able to accurately state all theother ones, both before and after. We have not yet grasped the resultswhich the reason alone can attain to. Problems may be solved in thestudy which have baffled all those who have sought a solution by theaid of their senses. To carry the art, however, to its highest pitch,

it is necessary that the reasoner should be able to utilize all thefacts which have come to his knowledge; and this in itself implies,

as you will readily see, a possession of all knowledge, which, evenin these days of free education and encyclopædias, is a somewhat rareaccomplishment. It is not so impossible, however, that a man shouldpossess all knowledge which is likely to be useful to him in his work,

and this I have endeavored in my case to do. If I remember rightly, youon one occasion, in the early days of our friendship, defined my limitsin a very precise fashion.”



“Yes,” I answered, laughing. “It was a singular document. Philosophy,

astronomy, and politics were marked at zero, I remember. Botanyvariable, geology profound as regards the mud-stains from any regionwithin fifty miles of town, chemistry eccentric, anatomy unsystematic,

sensational literature and crime records unique, violin-player, boxer,

swordsman, lawyer, and self-poisoner by cocaine and tobacco. Those, Ithink, were the main points of my analysis.”



Holmes grinned at the last item. “Well,” he said, “I say now, as I saidthen, that a man should keep his little brain-attic stocked with allthe furniture that he is likely to use, and the rest he can put awayin the lumber-room of his library, where he can get it if he wantsit. Now, for such a case as the one which has been submitted to usto-night, we need certainly to muster all our resources. Kindly handme down the letter K of the American Encyclopædia which stands uponthe shelf beside you. Thank you. Now let us consider the situation,

and see what may be deduced from it. In the first place, we may startwith a strong presumption that Colonel Openshaw had some very strongreason for leaving America. Men at his time of life do not change alltheir habits, and exchange willingly the charming climate of Floridafor the lonely life of an English provincial town. His extreme love ofsolitude in England suggests the idea that he was in fear of some oneor something, so we may assume as a working hypothesis that it was fearof some one or something which drove him from America. As to what itwas he feared, we can only deduce that by considering the formidableletters which were received by himself and his successors. Did youremark the post-marks of those letters?”



“The first was from Pondicherry, the second from Dundee, and the thirdfrom London.”



“From East London. What do you deduce from that?”



“They are all seaports. That the writer was on board of a ship.”



“Excellent. We have already a clew. There can be no doubt that theprobability—the strong probability—is that the writer was on boardof a ship. And now let us consider another point. In the case ofPondicherry, seven weeks elapsed between the threat and its fulfilment,

in Dundee it was only some three or four days. Does that suggestanything?”





“A greater distance to travel.”



“But the letter had also a greater distance to come.”



“Then I do not see the point.”



“There is at least a presumption that the vessel in which the manor men are is a sailing-ship. It looks as if they always sent theirsingular warning or token before them when starting upon their mission.

You see how quickly the deed followed the sign when it came fromDundee. If they had come from Pondicherry in a steamer they wouldhave arrived almost as soon as their letter. But as a matter of factseven weeks elapsed. I think that those seven weeks represented thedifference between the mail-boat which brought the letter, and thesailing-vessel which brought the writer.”



“It is possible.”



“More than that. It is probable. And now you see the deadly urgency ofthis new case, and why I urged young Openshaw to caution. The blow hasalways fallen at the end of the time which it would take the senders totravel the distance. But this one comes from London, and therefore wecannot count upon delay.”



“Good God!” I cried; “what can it mean, this relentless persecution?”



“The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital importanceto the person or persons in the sailing-ship. I think that it is quiteclear that there must be more than one of them. A single man could nothave carried out two deaths in such a way as to deceive a coroner’sjury. There must have been several in it, and they must have been menof resource and determination. Their papers they mean to have, be theholder of them who it may. In this way you see K. K. K. ceases to bethe initials of an individual, and becomes the badge of a society.”



“But of what society?”



“Have you never—” said Sherlock Holmes, bending forward and sinkinghis voice—“have you never heard of the Ku Klux Klan?”





“I never have.”



Holmes turned over the leaves of the book upon his knee. “Here itis,” said he, presently, “‘Ku Klux Klan. A name derived from thefanciful resemblance to the sound produced by cocking a rifle. Thisterrible secret society was formed by some ex-Confederate soldiers inthe Southern States after the Civil War, and it rapidly formed localbranches in different parts of the country, notably in Tennessee,

Louisiana, the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida. Its power was usedfor political purposes, principally for the terrorizing of the negrovoters, and the murdering and driving from the country of those whowere opposed to its views. Its outrages were usually preceded bya warning sent to the marked man in some fantastic but generallyrecognized shape—a sprig of oak-leaves in some parts, melon seeds ororange pips in others. On receiving this the victim might either openlyabjure his former ways, or might fly from the country. If he braved thematter out, death would unfailingly come upon him, and usually in somestrange and unforeseen manner. So perfect was the organization of thesociety, and so systematic its methods, that there is hardly a caseupon record where any man succeeded in braving it with impunity, or inwhich any of its outrages were traced home to the perpetrators. Forsome years the organization flourished, in spite of the efforts of theUnited States Government and of the better classes of the community inthe South. Eventually, in the year 1869, the movement rather suddenlycollapsed, although there have been sporadic outbreaks of the same sortsince that date.’



“You will observe,” said Holmes, laying down the volume, “that thesudden breaking up of the society was coincident with the disappearanceof Openshaw from America with their papers. It may well have been causeand effect. It is no wonder that he and his family have some of themore implacable spirits upon their track. You can understand that thisregister and diary may implicate some of the first men in the South,

and that there may be many who will not sleep easy at night until it isrecovered.”



“Then the page we have seen—”



“Is such as we might expect. It ran, if I remember right, ‘sent thepips to A, B, and C,’—that is, sent the society’s warning to them.

Then there are successive entries that A and B cleared, or left thecountry, and finally that C was visited, with, I fear, a sinisterresult for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let some light intothis dark place, and I believe that the only chance young Openshaw hasin the mean time is to do what I have told him. There is nothing moreto be said or to be done to-night, so hand me over my violin, and letus try to forget for half an hour the miserable weather and the stillmore miserable ways of our fellow-men.”







It had cleared in the morning, and the sun was shining with a subduedbrightness through the dim veil which hangs over the great city.

Sherlock Holmes was already at breakfast when I came down.



“You will excuse me for not waiting for you,” said he; “I have, Iforesee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of youngOpenshaw’s.”



“What steps will you take?” I asked.



“It will very much depend upon the results of my first inquiries. I mayhave to go down to Horsham, after all.”



“You will not go there first?”



“No, I shall commence with the city. Just ring the bell, and the maidwill bring up your coffee.”



As I waited, I lifted the unopened newspaper from the table and glancedmy eye over it. It rested upon a heading which sent a chill to my heart.



“Holmes,” I cried, “you are too late.”



“Ah!” said he, laying down his cup, “I feared as much. How was itdone?” He spoke calmly, but I could see that he was deeply moved.





“My eye caught the name of Openshaw, and the heading, ‘Tragedy nearWaterloo Bridge.’ Here is the account: ‘Between nine and ten lastnight Police-constable Cook, of the H Division, on duty near WaterlooBridge, heard a cry for help and a splash in the water. The night,

however, was extremely dark and stormy, so that, in spite of the helpof several passers-by, it was quite impossible to effect a rescue.

The alarm, however, was given, and, by the aid of the water-police,

the body was eventually recovered. It proved to be that of a younggentleman whose name, as it appears from an envelope which was found inhis pocket, was John Openshaw, and whose residence is near Horsham. Itis conjectured that he may have been hurrying down to catch the lasttrain from Waterloo Station, and that in his haste and the extremedarkness he missed his path and walked over the edge of one of thesmall landing-places for river steamboats. The body exhibited no tracesof violence, and there can be no doubt that the deceased had beenthe victim of an unfortunate accident, which should have the effectof calling the attention of the authorities to the condition of theriver-side landing-stages.’”



We sat in silence for some minutes, Holmes more depressed and shakenthan I had ever seen him.



“That hurts my pride, Watson,” he said, at last. “It is a pettyfeeling, no doubt, but it hurts my pride. It becomes a personal matterwith me now, and, if God sends me health, I shall set my hand upon thisgang. That he should come to me for help, and that I should send himaway to his death—!” He sprang from his chair and paced about the roomin uncontrollable agitation, with a flush upon his sallow cheeks, and anervous clasping and unclasping of his long, thin hands.



“They must be cunning devils,” he exclaimed, at last. “How could theyhave decoyed him down there? The Embankment is not on the direct lineto the station. The bridge, no doubt, was too crowded, even on such anight, for their purpose. Well, Watson, we shall see who will win inthe long run. I am going out now!”







“‘HOLMES,’ I CRIED, ‘YOU ARE TOO LATE’”











“To the police?”



“No; I shall be my own police. When I have spun the web they may takethe flies, but not before.”



All day I was engaged in my professional work, and it was late in theevening before I returned to Baker Street. Sherlock Holmes had not comeback yet. It was nearly ten o’clock before he entered, looking paleand worn. He walked up to the sideboard, and, tearing a piece from theloaf, he devoured it voraciously, washing it down with a long draughtof water.



“You are hungry,” I remarked.



“Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing sincebreakfast.”



“Nothing?”



“Not a bite. I had no time to think of it.”



“And how have you succeeded?”



“Well.”



“You have a clew?”



“I have them in the hollow of my hand. Young Openshaw shall not longremain unavenged. Why, Watson, let us put their own devilish trade-markupon them. It is well thought of!”



“What do you mean?”



He took an orange from the cupboard, and, tearing it to pieces, hesqueezed out the pips upon the table. Of these he took five, and thrustthem into an envelope. On the inside of the flap he wrote “S. H. for J.

O.” Then he sealed it and addressed it to “Captain James Calhoun, BarkLone Star, Savannah, Georgia.”



“That will await him when he enters port,” said he, chuckling. “It maygive him a sleepless night. He will find it as sure a precursor of hisfate as Openshaw did before him.”



“And who is this Captain Calhoun?”



“The leader of the gang. I shall have the others, but he first.”









“How did you trace it, then?”



He took a large sheet of paper from his pocket, all covered with datesand names.



“I have spent the whole day,” said he, “over Lloyd’s registers and thefiles of the old papers, following the future career of every vesselwhich touched at Pondicherry in January and February in ’83. Therewere thirty-six ships of fair tonnage which were reported there duringthose months. Of these, one, the Lone Star, instantly attracted myattention, since, although it was reported as having cleared fromLondon, the name is that which is given to one of the States of theUnion.”



“Texas, I think.”



“I was not and am not sure which; but I knew that the ship must have anAmerican origin.”



“What then?”



“I searched the Dundee records, and when I found that the bark LoneStar was there in January, ’85, my suspicion became a certainty. Ithen inquired as to the vessels which lay at present in the port ofLondon.”



“Yes?”



“The Lone Star had arrived here last week. I went down to the AlbertDock, and found that she had been taken down the river by the earlytide this morning, homeward bound to Savannah. I wired to Gravesend,

and learned that she had passed some time ago; and as the wind iseasterly, I have no doubt that she is now past the Goodwins, and notvery far from the Isle of Wight.”



“What will you do, then?”



“Oh, I have my hand upon him. He and the two mates, are, as I learn,

the only native-born Americans in the ship. The others are Finns andGermans. I know, also, that they were all three away from the ship lastnight. I had it from the stevedore who has been loading their cargo. Bythe time that their sailing-ship reaches Savannah the mail-boat willhave carried this letter, and the cable will have informed the policeof Savannah that these three gentlemen are badly wanted here upon acharge of murder.”



There is ever a flaw, however, in the best laid of human plans, andthe murderers of John Openshaw were never to receive the orange pipswhich would show them that another, as cunning and as resolute asthemselves, was upon their track. Very long and very severe were theequinoctial gales that year. We waited long for news of the LoneStar of Savannah, but none ever reached us. We did at last hear thatsomewhere far out in the Atlantic a shattered stern-post of a boat wasseen swinging in the trough of a wave, with the letters “L. S.” carvedupon it, and that is all which we shall ever know of the fate of theLone Star.







Adventure VITHE MAN WITH THE TWISTED LIP











ISA WHITNEY, brother of the late Elias Whitney, D.D., Principal of theTheological College of St. George’s, was much addicted to opium. Thehabit grew upon him, as I understand, from some foolish freak when hewas at college; for having read De Quincey’s description of his dreamsand sensations, he had drenched his tobacco with laudanum in an attemptto produce the same effects. He found, as so many more have done, thatthe practice is easier to attain than to get rid of, and for many yearshe continued to be a slave to the drug, an object of mingled horrorand pity to his friends and relatives. I can see him now, with yellow,

pasty face, drooping lids, and pin-point pupils, all huddled in achair, the wreck and ruin of a noble man.



One night—it was in June, ’89—there came a ring to my bell, about thehour when a man gives his first yawn and glances at the clock. I sat upin my chair, and my wife laid her needle-work down in her lap and madea little face of disappointment.











“A patient!” said she. “You’ll have to go out.”



I groaned, for I was newly come back from a weary day.



We heard the door open, a few hurried words, and then quick stepsupon the linoleum. Our own door flew open, and a lady, clad in somedark-colored stuff, with a black veil, entered the room.







“You will excuse my calling so late,” she began, and then, suddenlylosing her self-control, she ran forward, threw her arms about mywife’s neck, and sobbed upon her shoulder. “Oh, I’m in such trouble!”she cried; “I do so want a little help.”



“Why,” said my wife, pulling up her veil, “it is Kate Whitney. How youstartled me, Kate! I had not an idea who you were when you came in.”



“I didn’t know what to do, so I came straight to you.” That was alwaysthe way. Folk who were in grief came to my wife like birds to alight-house.



“It was very sweet of you to come. Now, you must have some wine andwater, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or should yourather that I sent James off to bed?”



“Oh, no, no! I want the Doctor’s advice and help, too. It’s about Isa.

He has not been home for two days. I am so frightened about him!”



It was not the first time that she had spoken to us of her husband’strouble, to me as a doctor, to my wife as an old friend and schoolcompanion. We soothed and comforted her by such words as we could find.

Did she know where her husband was? Was it possible that we could bringhim back to her?



It seemed that it was. She had the surest information that of late hehad, when the fit was on him, made use of an opium den in the farthesteast of the city. Hitherto his orgies had always been confined to oneday, and he had come back, twitching and shattered, in the evening.

But now the spell had been upon him eight-and-forty hours, and he laythere, doubtless among the dregs of the docks, breathing in the poisonor sleeping off the effects. There he was to be found, she was sure ofit, at the “Bar of Gold,” in Upper Swandam Lane. But what was she todo? How could she, a young and timid woman, make her way into such aplace, and pluck her husband out from among the ruffians who surroundedhim?



There was the case, and of course there was but one way out of it.

Might I not escort her to this place? And then, as a second thought,

why should she come at all? I was Isa Whitney’s medical adviser, andas such I had influence over him. I could manage it better if I werealone. I promised her on my word that I would send him home in acab within two hours if he were indeed at the address which she hadgiven me. And so in ten minutes I had left my arm-chair and cheerysitting-room behind me, and was speeding eastward in a hansom on astrange errand, as it seemed to me at the time, though the future onlycould show how strange it was to be.



But there was no great difficulty in the first stage of my adventure.

Upper Swandam Lane is a vile alley lurking behind the high wharveswhich line the north side of the river to the east of London Bridge.

Between a slop-shop and a gin-shop, approached by a steep flight ofsteps leading down to a black gap like the mouth of a cave, I found theden of which I was in search. Ordering my cab to wait, I passed downthe steps, worn hollow in the centre by the ceaseless tread of drunkenfeet, and by the light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I foundthe latch, and made my way into a long, low room, thick and heavywith the brown opium smoke, and terraced with wooden berths, like theforecastle of an emigrant ship.



Through the gloom one could dimly catch a glimpse of bodies lying instrange fantastic poses, bowed shoulders, bent knees, heads thrown backand chins pointing upward, with here and there a dark, lack-lustre eyeturned upon the new-comer. Out of the black shadows there glimmeredlittle red circles of light, now bright, now faint, as the burningpoison waxed or waned in the bowls of the metal pipes. The most laysilent, but some muttered to themselves, and others talked together ina strange, low, monotonous voice, their conversation coming in gushes,

and then suddenly tailing off into silence, each mumbling out his ownthoughts, and paying little heed to the words of his neighbor. At thefarther end was a small brazier of burning charcoal, beside which on athree-legged wooden stool there sat a tall, thin old man, with his jawresting upon his two fists, and his elbows upon his knees, staring intothe fire.



As I entered, a sallow Malay attendant had hurried up with a pipe forme and a supply of the drug, beckoning me to an empty berth.



“Thank you. I have not come to stay,” said I. “There is a friend ofmine here, Mr. Isa Whitney, and I wish to speak with him.”



There was a movement and an exclamation from my right, and, peeringthrough the gloom, I saw Whitney, pale, haggard, and unkempt, staringout at me.



“My God! It’s Watson,” said he. He was in a pitiable state of reaction,

with every nerve in a twitter. “I say, Watson, what o’clock is it?”



“Nearly eleven.”



“Of what day?”



“Of Friday, June 19th.”



“Good heavens! I thought it was Wednesday. It is Wednesday. What d’youwant to frighten a chap for?” He sank his face onto his arms, and beganto sob in a high treble key.



“I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting this twodays for you. You should be ashamed of yourself!”



“So I am. But you’ve got mixed, Watson, for I have only been here a fewhours, three pipes, four pipes—I forget how many. But I’ll go homewith you. I wouldn’t frighten Kate—poor little Kate. Give me yourhand! Have you a cab?”



“Yes, I have one waiting.”



“Then I shall go in it. But I must owe something. Find what I owe,

Watson. I am all off color. I can do nothing for myself.”



I walked down the narrow passage between the double row of sleepers,

holding my breath to keep out the vile, stupefying fumes of the drug,

and looking about for the manager. As I passed the tall man who satby the brazier I felt a sudden pluck at my skirt, and a low voicewhispered, “Walk past me, and then look back at me.” The words fellquite distinctly upon my ear. I glanced down. They could only have comefrom the old man at my side, and yet he sat now as absorbed as ever,

very thin, very wrinkled, bent with age, an opium pipe dangling downfrom between his knees, as though it had dropped in sheer lassitudefrom his fingers. I took two steps forward and looked back. It tookall my self-control to prevent me from breaking out into a cry ofastonishment. He had turned his back so that none could see him butI. His form had filled out, his wrinkles were gone, the dull eyes hadregained their fire, and there, sitting by the fire, and grinning atmy surprise, was none other than Sherlock Holmes. He made a slightmotion to me to approach him, and instantly, as he turned his face halfround to the company once more, subsided into a doddering, loose-lippedsenility.



“Holmes!” I whispered, “what on earth are you doing in this den?”



“As low as you can,” he answered; “I have excellent ears. If you wouldhave the great kindness to get rid of that sottish friend of yours Ishould be exceedingly glad to have a little talk with you.”



“I have a cab outside.”



“Then pray send him home in it. You may safely trust him, for heappears to be too limp to get into any mischief. I should recommend youalso to send a note by the cabman to your wife to say that you havethrown in your lot with me. If you will wait outside, I shall be withyou in five minutes.”



It was difficult to refuse any of Sherlock Holmes’s requests, for theywere always so exceedingly definite, and put forward with such a quietair of mastery. I felt, however, that when Whitney was once confinedin the cab my mission was practically accomplished, and for the rest,

I could not wish anything better than to be associated with my friendin one of those singular adventures which were the normal condition ofhis existence. In a few minutes I had written my note, paid Whitney’sbill, led him out to the cab, and seen him driven through the darkness.

In a very short time a decrepit figure had emerged from the opiumden, and I was walking down the street with Sherlock Holmes. For twostreets he shuffled along with a bent back and an uncertain foot. Then,

glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and burst into ahearty fit of laughter.



“I suppose, Watson,” said he, “that you imagine that I have addedopium-smoking to cocaine injections, and all the other littleweaknesses on which you have favored me with your medical views.”



“I was certainly surprised to find you there.”



“But not more so than I to find you.”



“I came to find a friend.”



“And I to find an enemy.”



“An enemy?”



“Yes; one of my natural enemies, or, shall I say, my natural prey.

Briefly, Watson, I am in the midst of a very remarkable inquiry, andI have hoped to find a clew in the incoherent ramblings of thesesots, as I have done before now. Had I been recognized in that den mylife would not have been worth an hour’s purchase; for I have used itbefore now for my own purposes, and the rascally Lascar who runs it hassworn to have vengeance upon me. There is a trap-door at the back ofthat building, near the corner of Paul’s Wharf, which could tell somestrange tales of what has passed through it upon the moonless nights.”



“What! You do not mean bodies?”



“Aye, bodies, Watson. We should be rich men if we had £1000 for everypoor devil who has been done to death in that den. It is the vilestmurder-trap on the whole river-side, and I fear that Neville St. Clairhas entered it never to leave it more. But our trap should be here.”He put his two forefingers between his teeth and whistled shrilly—asignal which was answered by a similar whistle from the distance,

followed shortly by the rattle of wheels and the clink of horses’hoofs.





“Now, Watson,” said Holmes, as a tall dog-cart dashed up through thegloom, throwing out two golden tunnels of yellow light from its sidelanterns. “You’ll come with me, won’t you?”



“If I can be of use.”



“Oh, a trusty comrade is always of use; and a chronicler still more so.

My room at ‘The Cedars’ is a double-bedded one.”



“‘The Cedars?’”



“Yes; that is Mr. St. Clair’s house. I am staying there while I conductthe inquiry.”



“Where is it, then?”



“Near Lee, in Kent. We have a seven-mile drive before us.”



“But I am all in the dark.”



“Of course you are. You’ll know all about it presently. Jump up here.

All right, John; we shall not need you. Here’s half a crown. Look outfor me to-morrow, about eleven. Give her her head. So long, then!”



He flicked the horse with his whip, and we dashed away through theendless succession of sombre and deserted streets, which widenedgradually, until we were flying across a broad balustraded bridge, withthe murky river flowing sluggishly beneath us. Beyond lay another dullwilderness of bricks and mortar, its silence broken only by the heavy,

regular footfall of the policeman, or the songs and shouts of somebelated party of revellers. A dull wrack was drifting slowly across thesky, and a star or two twinkled dimly here and there through the riftsof the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon hisbreast, and the air of a man who is lost in thought, while I sat besidehim, curious to learn what this new quest might be which seemed to taxhis powers so sorely, and yet afraid to break in upon the current ofhis thoughts. We had driven several miles, and were beginning to getto the fringe of the belt of suburban villas, when he shook himself,

shrugged his shoulders, and lit up his pipe with the air of a man whohas satisfied himself that he is acting for the best.



“You have a grand gift of silence, Watson,” said he. “It makes youquite invaluable as a companion. ’Pon my word, it is a great thingfor me to have some one to talk to, for my own thoughts are not overpleasant. I was wondering what I should say to this dear little womanto-night when she meets me at the door.”



“You forget that I know nothing about it.”



“I shall just have time to tell you the facts of the case before we getto Lee. It seems absurdly simple, and yet, somehow, I can get nothingto go upon. There’s plenty of thread, no doubt, but I can’t get the endof it into my hand. Now, I’ll state the case clearly and concisely toyou, Watson, and maybe you can see a spark where all is dark to me.”



“Proceed, then.”



“Some years ago—to be definite, in May, 1884—there came to Lee agentleman, Neville St. Clair by name, who appeared to have plentyof money. He took a large villa, laid out the grounds very nicely,

and lived generally in good style. By degrees he made friends in theneighborhood, and in 1887 he married the daughter of a local brewer, bywhom he now has two children. He had no occupation, but was interestedin several companies, and went into town as a rule in the morning,

returning by the 5.14 from Cannon Street every night. Mr. St. Clair isnow thirty-seven years of age, is a man of temperate habits, a goodhusband, a very affectionate father, and a man who is popular with allwho know him. I may add that his whole debts at the present moment,

as far as we have been able to ascertain, amount to £88 10s., whilehe has £220 standing to his credit in the Capital and Counties Bank.

There is no reason, therefore, to think that money troubles have beenweighing upon his mind.



“Last Monday Mr. Neville St. Clair went into town rather earlierthan usual, remarking before he started that he had two importantcommissions to perform, and that he would bring his little boy home abox of bricks. Now, by the merest chance, his wife received a telegramupon this same Monday, very shortly after his departure, to the effectthat a small parcel of considerable value which she had been expectingwas waiting for her at the offices of the Aberdeen Shipping Company.

Now, if you are well up in your London, you will know that the officesof the company is in Fresno Street, which branches out of Upper SwandamLane, where you found me to-night. Mrs. St. Clair had her lunch,

started for the city, did some shopping, proceeded to the company’soffice, got her packet, and found herself at exactly 4.35 walkingthrough Swandam Lane on her way back to the station. Have you followedme so far?”



“It is very clear.”



“If you remember, Monday was an exceedingly hot day, and Mrs. St.

Clair walked slowly, glancing about in the hope of seeing a cab, asshe did not like the neighborhood in which she found herself. Whileshe was walking in this way down Swandam Lane, she suddenly heard anejaculation or cry, and was struck cold to see her husband looking downat her, and, as it seemed to her, beckoning to her from a second-floorwindow. The window was open, and she distinctly saw his face, which shedescribes as being terribly agitated. He waved his hands franticallyto her, and then vanished from the window so suddenly that it seemedto her that he had been plucked back by some irresistible force frombehind. One singular point which struck her quick feminine eye wasthat, although he wore some dark coat, such as he had started to townin, he had on neither collar nor necktie.







“AT THE FOOT OF THE STAIRS SHE MET THIS LASCARSCOUNDREL.”













“Convinced that something was amiss with him, she rushed down thesteps—for the house was none other than the opium den in which youfound me to-night—and, running through the front room, she attemptedto ascend the stairs which led to the first floor. At the foot of thestairs, however, she met this Lascar scoundrel of whom I have spoken,

who thrust her back, and, aided by a Dane, who acts as assistant there,

pushed her out into the street. Filled with the most maddening doubtsand fears, she rushed down the lane, and, by rare good-fortune, met, inFresno Street, a number of constables with an inspector, all on theirway to their beat. The inspector and two men accompanied her back, and,

in spite of the continued resistance of the proprietor, they made theirway to the room in which Mr. St. Clair had last been seen. There was nosign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that floor there was no oneto be found, save a crippled wretch of hideous aspect, who, it seems,

made his home there. Both he and the Lascar stoutly swore that no oneelse had been in the front room during the afternoon. So determinedwas their denial that the inspector was staggered, and had almost cometo believe that Mrs. St. Clair had been deluded, when, with a cry, shesprang at a small deal box which lay upon the table, and tore the lidfrom it. Out there fell a cascade of children’s bricks. It was the toywhich he had promised to bring home.



“This discovery, and the evident confusion which the cripple showed,

made the inspector realize that the matter was serious. The rooms werecarefully examined, and results all pointed to an abominable crime.

The front room was plainly furnished as a sitting-room, and led into asmall bedroom, which looked out upon the back of one of the wharves.

Between the wharf and the bedroom window is a narrow strip, which isdry at low tide, but is covered at high tide with at least four anda half feet of water. The bedroom window was a broad one, and openedfrom below. On examination traces of blood were to be seen upon thewindow-sill, and several scattered drops were visible upon the woodenfloor of the bedroom. Thrust away behind a curtain in the front roomwere all the clothes of Mr. Neville St. Clair, with the exception ofhis coat. His boots, his socks, his hat, and his watch—all were there.

There were no signs of violence upon any of these garments, and therewere no other traces of Mr. Neville St. Clair. Out of the window hemust apparently have gone, for no other exit could be discovered, andthe ominous blood-stains upon the sill gave little promise that hecould save himself by swimming, for the tide was at its very highest atthe moment of the tragedy.



“And now as to the villains who seemed to be immediately implicated inthe matter. The Lascar was known to be a man of the vilest antecedents,

but as, by Mrs. St. Clair’s story, he was known to have been at thefoot of the stair within a very few seconds of her husband’s appearanceat the window, he could hardly have been more than an accessory to thecrime. His defense was one of absolute ignorance, and he protested thathe had no knowledge as to the doings of Hugh Boone, his lodger, andthat he could not account in any way for the presence of the missinggentleman’s clothes.



“So much for the Lascar manager. Now for the sinister cripple who livesupon the second floor of the opium den, and who was certainly thelast human being whose eyes rested upon Neville St. Clair. His nameis Hugh Boone, and his hideous face is one which is familiar to everyman who goes much to the city. He is a professional beggar, though,

in order to avoid the police regulations, he pretends to a smalltrade in wax vestas. Some little distance down Threadneedle Street,

upon the left-hand side, there is, as you may have remarked, a smallangle in the wall. Here it is that this creature takes his daily seat,

cross-legged, with his tiny stock of matches on his lap, and, as he isa piteous spectacle, a small rain of charity descends into the greasyleather cap which lies upon the pavement beside him. I have watched thefellow more than once, before ever I thought of making his professionalacquaintance, and I have been surprised at the harvest which he hasreaped in a short time. His appearance, you see, is so remarkable thatno one can pass him without observing him. A shock of orange hair, apale face disfigured by a horrible scar, which, by its contraction,

has turned up the outer edge of his upper lip, a bull-dog chin, and apair of very penetrating dark eyes, which present a singular contrastto the color of his hair, all mark him out from amid the commoncrowd of mendicants, and so, too, does his wit, for he is ever readywith a reply to any piece of chaff which may be thrown at him by thepassers-by. This is the man whom we now learn to have been the lodgerat the opium den, and to have been the last man to see the gentleman ofwhom we are in quest.”



“But a cripple!” said I. “What could he have done single-handed againsta man in the prime of life?”



“He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in otherrespects he appears to be a powerful and well-nurtured man. Surely yourmedical experience would tell you, Watson, that weakness in one limb isoften compensated for by exceptional strength in the others.”



“Pray continue your narrative.”



“Mrs. St. Clair had fainted at the sight of the blood upon the window,

and she was escorted home in a cab by the police, as her presencecould be of no help to them in their investigations. Inspector Barton,

who had charge of the case, made a very careful examination of thepremises, but without finding anything which threw any light upon thematter. One mistake had been made in not arresting Boone instantly, ashe was allowed some few minutes during which he might have communicatedwith his friend the Lascar, but this fault was soon remedied, and hewas seized and searched, without anything being found which couldincriminate him. There were, it is true, some blood-stains upon hisright shirt-sleeve, but he pointed to his ring-finger, which had beencut near the nail, and explained that the bleeding came from there,

adding that he had been to the window not long before, and that thestains which had been observed there came doubtless from the samesource. He denied strenuously having ever seen Mr. Neville St. Clair,

and swore that the presence of the clothes in his room was as mucha mystery to him as to the police. As to Mrs. St. Clair’s assertionthat she had actually seen her husband at the window, he declared thatshe must have been either mad or dreaming. He was removed, loudlyprotesting, to the police-station, while the inspector remained uponthe premises in the hope that the ebbing tide might afford some freshclew.



“And it did, though they hardly found upon the mud-bank what they hadfeared to find. It was Neville St. Clair’s coat, and not Neville St.

Clair, which lay uncovered as the tide receded. And what do you thinkthey found in the pockets?”



“I cannot imagine.”



“No, I don’t think you would guess. Every pocket stuffed with penniesand half-pennies—421 pennies and 270 half-pennies. It was no wonderthat it had not been swept away by the tide. But a human body is adifferent matter. There is a fierce eddy between the wharf and thehouse. It seemed likely enough that the weighted coat had remained whenthe stripped body had been sucked away into the river.”



“But I understand that all the other clothes were found in the room.

Would the body be dressed in a coat alone?”



“No, sir, but the facts might be met speciously enough. Suppose thatthis man Boone had thrust Neville St. Clair through the window, thereis no human eye which could have seen the deed. What would he do then?

It would of course instantly strike him that he must get rid of thetell-tale garments. He would seize the coat, then, and be in the act ofthrowing it out, when it would occur to him that it would swim and notsink. He has little time, for he has heard the scuffle down-stairs whenthe wife tried to force her way up, and perhaps he has already heardfrom his Lascar confederate that the police are hurrying up the street.

There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret horde,

where he has accumulated the fruits of his beggary, and he stuffs allthe coins upon which he can lay his hands into the pockets to make sureof the coat’s sinking. He throws it out, and would have done the samewith the other garments had not he heard the rush of steps below, andonly just had time to close the window when the police appeared.”



“It certainly sounds feasible.”





“Well, we will take it as a working hypothesis for want of a better.

Boone, as I have told you, was arrested and taken to the station, butit could not be shown that there had ever before been anything againsthim. He had for years been known as a professional beggar, but his lifeappeared to have been a very quiet and innocent one. There the matterstands at present, and the questions which have to be solved—whatNeville St. Clair was doing in the opium den, what happened to himwhen there, where is he now, and what Hugh Boone had to do with hisdisappearance—are all as far from a solution as ever. I confess that Icannot recall any case within my experience which looked at the firstglance so simple, and yet which presented such difficulties.”



While Sherlock Holmes had been detailing this singular series ofevents, we had been whirling through the outskirts of the great townuntil the last straggling houses had been left behind, and we rattledalong with a country hedge upon either side of us. Just as he finished,

however, we drove through two scattered villages, where a few lightsstill glimmered in the windows.



“We are on the outskirts of Lee,” said my companion. “We have touchedon three English counties in our short drive, starting in Middlesex,

passing over an angle of Surrey, and ending in Kent. See that lightamong the trees? That is ‘The Cedars,’ and beside that lamp sits awoman whose anxious ears have already, I have little doubt, caught theclink of our horse’s feet.”



“But why are you not conducting the case from Baker Street?” I asked.



“Because there are many inquiries which must be made out here. Mrs.

St. Clair has most kindly put two rooms at my disposal, and you mayrest assured that she will have nothing but a welcome for my friendand colleague. I hate to meet her, Watson, when I have no news of herhusband. Here we are. Whoa, there, whoa!”



We had pulled up in front of a large villa which stood within its owngrounds. A stable-boy had run out to the horse’s head, and, springingdown, I followed Holmes up the small, winding gravel-drive which led tothe house. As we approached, the door flew open, and a little blondewoman stood in the opening, clad in some sort of light mousseline desoie, with a touch of fluffy pink chiffon at her neck and wrists. Shestood with her figure outlined against the flood of light, one handupon the door, one half-raised in her eagerness, her body slightlybent, her head and face protruded, with eager eyes and parted lips, astanding question.



“Well?” she cried, “well?” And then, seeing that there were two ofus, she gave a cry of hope which sank into a groan as she saw that mycompanion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.



“No good news?”



“None.”



“No bad?”



“No.”



“Thank God for that. But come in. You must be weary, for you have had along day.”



“This is my friend, Dr. Watson. He has been of most vital use to me inseveral of my cases, and a lucky chance has made it possible for me tobring him out and associate him with this investigation.”



“I am delighted to see you,” said she, pressing my hand warmly.

“You will, I am sure, forgive anything that may be wanting in ourarrangements, when you consider the blow which has come so suddenlyupon us.”



“My dear madam,” said I, “I am an old campaigner, and if I were not,

I can very well see that no apology is needed. If I can be of anyassistance, either to you or to my friend here, I shall be indeedhappy.”



“Now, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,” said the lady, as we entered a well-litdining-room, upon the table of which a cold supper had been laid out,

“I should very much like to ask you one or two plain questions, towhich I beg that you will give a plain answer.”



“Certainly, madam.”



“Do not trouble about my feelings. I am not hysterical, nor given tofainting. I simply wish to hear your real, real opinion.”



“Upon what point?”



“In your heart of hearts do you think that Neville is alive?”



Sherlock Holmes seemed to be embarrassed by the question. “Frankly,

now!” she repeated, standing upon the rug and looking keenly down athim as he leaned back in a basket-chair.



“Frankly, then, madam, I do not.”



“You think that he is dead?”



“I do.”



“Murdered?”



“I don’t say that. Perhaps.”



“And on what day did he meet his death?”



“On Monday.”



“Then perhaps, Mr. Holmes, you will be good enough to explain how it isthat I have received a letter from him to-day.”



Sherlock Holmes sprang out of his chair as if he had been galvanized.



“What!” he roared.



“Yes, to-day.” She stood smiling, holding up a little slip of paper inthe air.



“May I see it?”



“Certainly.”



He snatched it from her in his eagerness, and smoothing it out uponthe table, he drew over the lamp, and examined it intently. I had leftmy chair, and was gazing at it over his shoulder. The envelope was avery coarse one, and was stamped with the Gravesend post-mark, and withthe date of that very day, or rather of the day before, for it wasconsiderably after midnight.





“Coarse writing,” murmured Holmes. “Surely this is not your husband’swriting, madam.”



“No, but the enclosure is.”



“I perceive also that whoever addressed the envelope had to go andinquire as to the address.”



“How can you tell that?”



“The name, you see, is in perfectly black ink, which has dried itself.

The rest is of the grayish color, which shows that blotting-paper hasbeen used. If it had been written straight off, and then blotted, nonewould be of a deep black shade. This man has written the name, andthere has then been a pause before he wrote the address, which can onlymean that he was not familiar with it. It is, of course, a trifle, butthere is nothing so important as trifles. Let us now see the letter.

Ha! there has been an enclosure here!”



“Yes, there was a ring. His signet-ring.”



“And you are sure that this is your husband’s hand?”



“One of his hands.”



“One?”



“His hand when he wrote hurriedly. It is very unlike his usual writing,

and yet I know it well.”



“‘Dearest do not be frightened. All will come well. There is ahuge error which it may take some little time to rectify. Wait inpatience.—Neville.’ Written in pencil upon the fly-leaf of a book,

octavo size, no water-mark. Hum! Posted to-day in Gravesend by a manwith a dirty thumb. Ha! And the flap has been gummed, if I am not verymuch in error, by a person who had been chewing tobacco. And you haveno doubt that it is your husband’s hand, madam?”



“None. Neville wrote those words.”



“And they were posted to-day at Gravesend. Well, Mrs. St. Clair, theclouds lighten, though I should not venture to say that the danger isover.”



“But he must be alive, Mr. Holmes.”



“Unless this is a clever forgery to put us on the wrong scent. Thering, after all, proves nothing. It may have been taken from him.”



“No, no; it is, it is, it is his very own writing!”



“Very well. It may, however, have been written on Monday, and onlyposted to-day.”



“That is possible.”



“If so, much may have happened between.”



“Oh, you must not discourage me, Mr. Holmes. I know that all is wellwith him. There is so keen a sympathy between us that I should know ifevil came upon him. On the very day that I saw him last he cut himselfin the bedroom, and yet I in the dining-room rushed up-stairs instantlywith the utmost certainty that something had happened. Do you thinkthat I would respond to such a trifle, and yet be ignorant of hisdeath?”



“I have seen too much not to know that the impression of a woman maybe more valuable than the conclusion of an analytical reasoner. Andin this letter you certainly have a very strong piece of evidence tocorroborate your view. But if your husband is alive, and able to writeletters, why should he remain away from you?”



“I cannot imagine. It is unthinkable.”



“And on Monday he made no remarks before leaving you?”



“No.”



“And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?”



“Very much so.”



“Was the window open?”



“Yes.”



“Then he might have called to you?”



“He might.”



“He only, as I understand, gave an inarticulate cry?”



“Yes.”



“A call for help, you thought?”



“Yes. He waved his hands.”



“But it might have been a cry of surprise. Astonishment at theunexpected sight of you might cause him to throw up his hands?”



“It is possible.”



“And you thought he was pulled back?”



“He disappeared so suddenly.”



“He might have leaped back. You did not see any one else in the room?”



“No, but this horrible man confessed to having been there, and theLascar was at the foot of the stairs.”



“Quite so. Your husband, as far as you could see, had his ordinaryclothes on?”



“But without his collar or tie. I distinctly saw his bare throat.”



“Had he ever spoken of Swandam Lane?”



“Never.”



“Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?”



“Never.”



“Thank you, Mrs. St. Clair. Those are the principal points about whichI wished to be absolutely clear. We shall now have a little supper andthen retire, for we may have a very busy day to-morrow.”



A large and comfortable double-bedded room had been placed at ourdisposal, and I was quickly between the sheets, for I was weary aftermy night of adventure. Sherlock Holmes was a man, however, who, whenhe had an unsolved problem upon his mind, would go for days, and evenfor a week, without rest, turning it over, rearranging his facts,

looking at it from every point of view, until he had either fathomedit, or convinced himself that his data were insufficient. It was soonevident to me that he was now preparing for an all-night sitting. Hetook off his coat and waistcoat, put on a large blue dressing-gown,

and then wandered about the room collecting pillows from his bed andcushions from the sofa and arm-chairs. With these he constructed a sortof Eastern divan, upon which he perched himself cross-legged, with anounce of shag tobacco and a box of matches laid out in front of him.

In the dim light of the lamp I saw him sitting there, an old briarpipe between his lips, his eyes fixed vacantly upon the corner of theceiling, the blue smoke curling up from him, silent, motionless, withthe light shining upon his strong-set aquiline features. So he sat as Idropped off to sleep, and so he sat when a sudden ejaculation caused meto wake up, and I found the summer sun shining into the apartment. Thepipe was still between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and theroom was full of a dense tobacco haze, but nothing remained of the heapof shag which I had seen upon the previous night.



“Awake, Watson?” he asked.



“Yes.”



“Game for a morning drive?”



“Certainly.”



“Then dress. No one is stirring yet, but I know where the stable-boysleeps, and we shall soon have the trap out.” He chuckled to himselfas he spoke, his eyes twinkled, and he seemed a different man to thesombre thinker of the previous night.



As I dressed I glanced at my watch. It was no wonder that no one wasstirring. It was twenty-five minutes past four. I had hardly finishedwhen Holmes returned with the news that the boy was putting in thehorse.



“I want to test a little theory of mine,” said he, pulling on hisboots. “I think, Watson, that you are now standing in the presence ofone of the most absolute fools in Europe. I deserve to be kicked fromhere to Charing Cross. But I think I have the key of the affair now.”



“And where is it?” I asked, smiling.



“In the bath-room,” he answered. “Oh yes, I am not joking,” hecontinued, seeing my look of incredulity. “I have just been there, andI have taken it out, and I have got it in this Gladstone bag. Come on,

my boy, and we shall see whether it will not fit the lock.”



We made our way down-stairs as quietly as possible, and out into thebright morning sunshine. In the road stood our horse and trap, withthe half-clad stable-boy waiting at the head. We both sprang in, andaway we dashed down the London Road. A few country carts were stirring,

bearing in vegetables to the metropolis, but the lines of villas oneither side were as silent and lifeless as some city in a dream.



“It has been in some points a singular case,” said Holmes, flicking thehorse on into a gallop. “I confess that I have been as blind as a mole,

but it is better to learn wisdom late than never to learn it at all.”



In town the earliest risers were just beginning to look sleepily fromtheir windows as we drove through the streets of the Surrey side.

Passing down the Waterloo Bridge Road we crossed over the river, anddashing up Wellington Street wheeled sharply to the right, and foundourselves in Bow Street. Sherlock Holmes was well known to the Force,

and the two constables at the door saluted him. One of them held thehorse’s head while the other led us in.



“Who is on duty?” asked Holmes.



“Inspector Bradstreet, sir.”



“Ah, Bradstreet, how are you?” A tall, stout official had come down thestone-flagged passage, in a peaked cap and frogged jacket. “I wish tohave a quiet word with you, Bradstreet.”



“Certainly, Mr. Holmes. Step into my room here.”



It was a small, office-like room, with a huge ledger upon the table,

and a telephone projecting from the wall. The inspector sat down at hisdesk.



“What can I do for you, Mr. Holmes?”



“I called about that beggarman, Boone—the one who was charged withbeing concerned in the disappearance of Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee.”



“Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries.”



“So I heard. You have him here?”



“In the cells.”





“Is he quiet?”



“Oh, he gives no trouble. But he is a dirty scoundrel.”



“Dirty?”



“Yes, it is all we can do to make him wash his hands, and his face isas black as a tinker’s. Well, when once his case has been settled, hewill have a regular prison bath; and I think, if you saw him, you wouldagree with me that he needed it.”



“I should like to see him very much.”



“Would you? That is easily done. Come this way. You can leave your bag.”



“No, I think that I’ll take it.”



“Very good. Come this way, if you please.” He led us down a passage,

opened a barred door, passed down a winding stair, and brought us to awhitewashed corridor with a line of doors on each side.



“The third on the right is his,” said the inspector. “Here it is!” Hequietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door and glancedthrough.



“He is asleep,” said he. “You can see him very well.”



We both put our eyes to the grating. The prisoner lay with his facetowards us, in a very deep sleep, breathing slowly and heavily. He wasa middle-sized man, coarsely clad as became his calling, with a coloredshirt protruding through the rent in his tattered coat. He was, as theinspector had said, extremely dirty, but the grime which covered hisface could not conceal its repulsive ugliness. A broad wheal from anold scar ran right across it from eye to chin, and by its contractionhad turned up one side of the upper lip, so that three teeth wereexposed in a perpetual snarl. A shock of very bright red hair grew lowover his eyes and forehead.



“He’s a beauty, isn’t he?” said the inspector.



“He certainly needs a wash,” remarked Holmes. “I had an idea that hemight, and I took the liberty of bringing the tools with me.” He openedthe Gladstone bag as he spoke, and took out, to my astonishment, a verylarge bath-sponge.





“He! he! You are a funny one,” chuckled the inspector.



“Now, if you will have the great goodness to open that door veryquietly, we will soon make him cut a much more respectable figure.”



“Well, I don’t know why not,” said the inspector. “He doesn’t looka credit to the Bow Street cells, does he?” He slipped his key intothe lock, and we all very quietly entered the cell. The sleeper halfturned, and then settled down once more into a deep slumber. Holmesstooped to the water-jug, moistened his sponge, and then rubbed ittwice vigorously across and down the prisoner’s face.



“Let me introduce you,” he shouted, “to Mr. Neville St. Clair, of Lee,

in the county of Kent.”



Never in my life have I seen such a sight. The man’s face peeled offunder the sponge like the bark from a tree. Gone was the coarse browntint! Gone, too, was the horrid scar which had seamed it across, andthe twisted lip which had given the repulsive sneer to the face! Atwitch brought away the tangled red hair, and there, sitting up inhis bed, was a pale, sad-faced, refined-looking man, black-haired andsmooth-skinned, rubbing his eyes, and staring about him with sleepybewilderment. Then suddenly realizing the exposure, he broke into ascream, and threw himself down with his face to the pillow.



“Great heavens!” cried the inspector, “it is, indeed, the missing man.

I know him from the photograph.”



The prisoner turned with the reckless air of a man who abandons himselfto his destiny. “Be it so,” said he. “And pray, what am I charged with?”



“With making away with Mr. Neville St.—— Oh, come, you can’t becharged with that, unless they make a case of attempted suicide of it,”said the inspector, with a grin. “Well, I have been twenty-seven yearsin the force, but this really takes the cake.”







“If I am Mr. Neville St. Clair, then it is obvious that no crime hasbeen committed, and that, therefore, I am illegally detained.”



“No crime, but a very great error has been committed,” said Holmes.

“You would have done better to have trusted your wife.”



“It was not the wife, it was the children,” groaned the prisoner. “Godhelp me, I would not have them ashamed of their father. My God! What anexposure! What can I do?”



Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted him kindlyon the shoulder.



“If you leave it to a court of law to clear the matter up,” said he,

“of course you can hardly avoid publicity. On the other hand, if youconvince the police authorities that there is no possible case againstyou, I do not know that there is any reason that the details shouldfind their way into the papers. Inspector Bradstreet would, I am sure,

make notes upon anything which you might tell us, and submit it to theproper authorities. The case would then never go into court at all.”



“God bless you!” cried the prisoner, passionately. “I would haveendured imprisonment, aye, even execution, rather than have left mymiserable secret as a family blot to my children.



“You are the first who have ever heard my story. My father wasa school-master in Chesterfield, where I received an excellenteducation. I travelled in my youth, took to the stage, and finallybecame a reporter on an evening paper in London. One day my editorwished to have a series of articles upon begging in the metropolis,

and I volunteered to supply them. There was the point from which allmy adventures started. It was only by trying begging as an amateurthat I could get the facts upon which to base my articles. When anactor I had, of course, learned all the secrets of making up, and hadbeen famous in the greenroom for my skill. I took advantage now ofmy attainments. I painted my face, and to make myself as pitiable aspossible I made a good scar and fixed one side of my lip in a twistby the aid of a small slip of flesh-colored plaster. Then with a redhead of hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in thebusiest part of the city, ostensibly as a match-seller, but really as abeggar. For seven hours I plied my trade, and when I returned home inthe evening I found, to my surprise, that I had received no less than26s. 4d.



“I wrote my articles, and thought little more of the matter until, sometime later, I backed a bill for a friend, and had a writ served uponme for £25. I was at my wits’ end where to get the money, but a suddenidea came to me. I begged a fortnight’s grace from the creditor, askedfor a holiday from my employers, and spent the time in begging in thecity under my disguise. In ten days I had the money, and had paid thedebt.



“Well, you can imagine how hard it was to settle down to arduouswork at £2 a week, when I knew that I could earn as much in a day bysmearing my face with a little paint, laying my cap on the ground, andsitting still. It was a long fight between my pride and the money,

but the dollars won at last, and I threw up reporting, and sat dayafter day in the corner which I had first chosen, inspiring pity by myghastly face, and filling my pockets with coppers. Only one man knewmy secret. He was the keeper of a low den in which I used to lodge inSwandam Lane, where I could every morning emerge as a squalid beggar,

and in the evenings transform myself into a well-dressed man abouttown. This fellow, a Lascar, was well paid by me for his rooms, so thatI knew that my secret was safe in his possession.



“Well, very soon I found that I was saving considerable sums of money.

I do not mean that any beggar in the streets of London could earn £700a year—which is less than my average takings—but I had exceptionaladvantages in my power of making up, and also in a facility ofrepartee, which improved by practice, and made me quite a recognizedcharacter in the city. All day a stream of pennies, varied by silver,

poured in upon me, and it was a very bad day in which I failed to take£2.



“As I grew richer I grew more ambitious, took a house in the country,

and eventually married, without any one having a suspicion as to myreal occupation. My dear wife knew that I had business in the city. Shelittle knew what.



“Last Monday I had finished for the day, and was dressing in my roomabove the opium den, when I looked out of my window, and saw, to myhorror and astonishment, that my wife was standing in the street, withher eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of surprise, threw up my armsto cover my face, and, rushing to my confidant, the Lascar, entreatedhim to prevent any one from coming up to me. I heard her voicedown-stairs, but I knew that she could not ascend. Swiftly I threw offmy clothes, pulled on those of a beggar, and put on my pigments andwig. Even a wife’s eyes could not pierce so complete a disguise. Butthen it occurred to me that there might be a search in the room, andthat the clothes might betray me. I threw open the window, reopeningby my violence a small cut which I had inflicted upon myself in thebedroom that morning. Then I seized my coat, which was weighted bythe coppers which I had just transferred to it from the leather bagin which I carried my takings. I hurled it out of the window, and itdisappeared into the Thames. The other clothes would have followed, butat that moment there was a rush of constables up the stair, and a fewminutes after I found, rather, I confess, to my relief, that insteadof being identified as Mr. Neville St. Clair, I was arrested as hismurderer.



“I do not know that there is anything else for me to explain. I wasdetermined to preserve my disguise as long as possible, and hence mypreference for a dirty face. Knowing that my wife would be terriblyanxious, I slipped off my ring, and confided it to the Lascar at amoment when no constable was watching me, together with a hurriedscrawl, telling her that she had no cause to fear.”





“That note only reached her yesterday,” said Holmes.



“Good God! What a week she must have spent!”



“The police have watched this Lascar,” said Inspector Bradstreet, “andI can quite understand that he might find it difficult to post a letterunobserved. Probably he handed it to some sailor customer of his, whoforgot all about it for some days.”



“That was it,” said Holmes, nodding approvingly; “I have no doubt ofit. But have you never been prosecuted for begging?”



“Many times; but what was a fine to me?”



“It must stop here, however,” said Bradstreet. “If the police are tohush this thing up, there must be no more of Hugh Boone.”



“I have sworn it by the most solemn oaths which a man can take.”



“In that case I think that it is probable that no further steps may betaken. But if you are found again, then all must come out. I am sure,

Mr. Holmes, that we are very much indebted to you for having clearedthe matter up. I wish I knew how you reach your results.”



“I reached this one,” said my friend, “by sitting upon five pillows andconsuming an ounce of shag. I think, Watson, that if we drive to BakerStreet we shall just be in time for breakfast.”








Adventure VIITHE ADVENTURE OF THE BLUE CARBUNCLE











I HAD called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second morningafter Christmas, with the intention of wishing him the compliments ofthe season. He was lounging upon the sofa in a purple dressing-gown,

a pipe-rack within his reach upon the right, and a pile of crumpledmorning papers, evidently newly studied, near at hand. Beside the couchwas a wooden chair, and on the angle of the back hung a very seedyand disreputable hard-felt hat, much the worse for wear, and crackedin several places. A lens and a forceps lying upon the seat of thechair suggested that the hat had been suspended in this manner for thepurpose of examination.



“You are engaged,” said I; “perhaps I interrupt you.”



“Not at all. I am glad to have a friend with whom I can discuss myresults. The matter is a perfectly trivial one” (he jerked his thumb inthe direction of the old hat), “but there are points in connection withit which are not entirely devoid of interest and even of instruction.”











I seated myself in his arm-chair and warmed my hands before hiscrackling fire, for a sharp frost had set in, and the windows werethick with the ice crystals. “I suppose,” I remarked, “that, homely asit looks, this thing has some deadly story linked on to it—that it isthe clew which will guide you in the solution of some mystery and thepunishment of some crime.”







“No, no. No crime,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “Only one ofthose whimsical little incidents which will happen when you havefour million human beings all jostling each other within the space ofa few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so dense a swarmof humanity, every possible combination of events may be expected totake place, and many a little problem will be presented which maybe striking and bizarre without being criminal. We have already hadexperience of such.”



“So much so,” I remarked, “that of the last six cases which I haveadded to my notes, three have been entirely free of any legal crime.”



“Precisely. You allude to my attempt to recover the Irene Adler papers,

to the singular case of Miss Mary Sutherland, and to the adventure ofthe man with the twisted lip. Well, I have no doubt that this smallmatter will fall into the same innocent category. You know Peterson,

the commissionaire?”



“Yes.”



“It is to him that this trophy belongs.”



“It is his hat.”



“No, no; he found it. Its owner is unknown. I beg that you will lookupon it, not as a battered billycock, but as an intellectual problem.

And, first, as to how it came here. It arrived upon Christmas morning,

in company with a good fat goose, which is, I have no doubt, roastingat this moment in front of Peterson’s fire. The facts are these: aboutfour o’clock on Christmas morning, Peterson, who, as you know, is avery honest fellow, was returning from some small jollification, andwas making his way homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of himhe saw, in the gaslight, a tallish man, walking with a slight stagger,

and carrying a white goose slung over his shoulder. As he reached thecorner of Goodge Street, a row broke out between this stranger and alittle knot of roughs. One of the latter knocked off the man’s hat, onwhich he raised his stick to defend himself, and, swinging it over hishead, smashed the shop window behind him. Peterson had rushed forwardto protect the stranger from his assailants; but the man, shocked athaving broken the window, and seeing an official-looking person inuniform rushing towards him, dropped his goose, took to his heels, andvanished amid the labyrinth of small streets which lie at the back ofTottenham Court Road. The roughs had also fled at the appearance ofPeterson, so that he was left in possession of the field of battle, andalso of the spoils of victory in the shape of this battered hat and amost unimpeachable Christmas goose.”



“Which surely he restored to their owner?”



“My dear fellow, there lies the problem. It is true that ‘For Mrs.

Henry Baker’ was printed upon a small card which was tied to the bird’sleft leg, and it is also true that the initials ‘H. B.’ are legibleupon the lining of this hat; but as there are some thousands of Bakers,

and some hundreds of Henry Bakers in this city of ours, it is not easyto restore lost property to any one of them.”



“What, then, did Peterson do?”



“He brought round both hat and goose to me on Christmas morning,

knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me. Thegoose we retained until this morning, when there were signs that, inspite of the slight frost, it would be well that it should be eatenwithout unnecessary delay. Its finder has carried it off, therefore, tofulfil the ultimate destiny of a goose, while I continue to retain thehat of the unknown gentleman who lost his Christmas dinner.”



“Did he not advertise?”



“No.”



“Then, what clue could you have as to his identity?”



“Only as much as we can deduce.”



“From his hat?”



“Precisely.”



“But you are joking. What can you gather from this old battered felt?”



“Here is my lens. You know my methods. What can you gather yourself asto the individuality of the man who has worn this article?”



I took the tattered object in my hands and turned it over ratherruefully. It was a very ordinary black hat of the usual round shape,

hard, and much the worse for wear. The lining had been of red silk, butwas a good deal discolored. There was no maker’s name; but, as Holmeshad remarked, the

initials “H. B.” were scrawled upon one side. It waspierced in the brim for a hat-securer, but the elastic was missing. Forthe rest, it was cracked, exceedingly dusty, and spotted in severalplaces, although there seemed to have been some attempt to hide thediscolored patches by smearing them with ink.



“I can see nothing,” said I, handing it back to my friend.



“On the contrary, Watson, you can see everything. You fail, however, toreason from what you see. You are too timid in drawing your inferences.”



“Then, pray tell me what it is that you can infer from this hat?”



He picked it up and gazed at it in the peculiar introspective fashionwhich was characteristic of him. “It is perhaps less suggestive thanit might have been,” he remarked, “and yet there are a few inferenceswhich are very distinct, and a few others which represent at least astrong balance of probability. That the man was highly intellectualis of course obvious upon the face of it, and also that he was fairlywell-to-do within the last three years, although he has now fallen uponevil days. He had foresight, but has less now than formerly, pointingto a moral retrogression, which, when taken with the decline of hisfortunes, seems to indicate some evil influence, probably drink, atwork upon him. This may account also for the obvious fact that his wifehas ceased to love him.”



“My dear Holmes!”







“He has, however, retained some degree of self-respect,” he continued,

disregarding my remonstrance. “He is a man who leads a sedentarylife, goes out little, is out of training entirely, is middle-aged,

has grizzled hair which he has had cut within the last few days, andwhich he anoints with lime-cream. These are the more patent facts whichare to be deduced from his hat. Also, by-the-way, that it is extremelyimprobable that he has gas laid on in his house.”



“You are certainly joking, Holmes.”



“Not in the least. Is it possible that even now, when I give you theseresults, you are unable to see how they are attained?”



“I have no doubt that I am very stupid; but I must confess that I amunable to follow you. For example, how did you deduce that this man wasintellectual?”



For answer Holmes clapped the hat upon his head. It came right over theforehead and settled upon the bridge of his nose. “It is a questionof cubic capacity,” said he; “a man with so large a brain must havesomething in it.”



“The decline of his fortunes, then?”



“This hat is three years old. These flat brims curled at the edge camein then. It is a hat of the very best quality. Look at the band ofribbed silk and the excellent lining. If this man could afford to buyso expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no hat since, then hehas assuredly gone down in the world.”



“Well, that is clear enough, certainly. But how about the foresight andthe moral retrogression?”



Sherlock Holmes laughed. “Here is the foresight,” said he, puttinghis finger upon the little disk and loop of the hat-securer. “Theyare never sold upon hats. If this man ordered one, it is a sign of acertain amount of foresight, since he went out of his way to take thisprecaution against the wind. But since we see that he has broken theelastic, and has not troubled to replace it, it is obvious that hehas less foresight now than formerly, which is a distinct proof of aweakening nature. On the other hand, he has endeavored to conceal someof these stains upon the felt by daubing them with ink, which is asign that he has not entirely lost his self-respect.”



“Your reasoning is certainly plausible.”



“The further points, that he is middle-aged, that his hair is grizzled,

that it has been recently cut, and that he uses lime-cream, are allto be gathered from a close examination of the lower part of thelining. The lens discloses a large number of hair-ends, clean cut bythe scissors of the barber. They all appear to be adhesive, and thereis a distinct odor of lime-cream. This dust, you will observe, is notthe gritty, gray dust of the street, but the fluffy brown dust of thehouse, showing that it has been hung up in-doors most of the time;while the marks of moisture upon the inside are proof positive that thewearer perspired very freely, and could, therefore, hardly be in thebest of training.”



“But his wife—you said that she had ceased to love him.”



“This hat has not been brushed for weeks. When I see you, my dearWatson, with a week’s accumulation of dust upon your hat, and when yourwife allows you to go out in such a state, I shall fear that you alsohave been unfortunate enough to lose your wife’s affection.”



“But he might be a bachelor.”



“Nay, he was bringing home the goose as a peace-offering to his wife.

Remember the card upon the bird’s leg.”



“You have an answer to everything. But how on earth do you deduce thatthe gas is not laid on in his house?”



“One tallow stain, or even two, might come by chance; but when Isee no less than five, I think that there can be little doubt thatthe individual must be brought into frequent contact with burningtallow—walks up-stairs at night probably with his hat in one hand anda guttering candle in the other. Anyhow, he never got tallow-stainsfrom a gas-jet. Are you satisfied?”



“Well, it is very ingenious,” said I, laughing; “but since, as you saidjust now, there has been no crime committed, and no harm done, savethe loss of a goose, all this seems to be rather a waste of energy.”



Sherlock Holmes had opened his mouth to reply, when the door flewopen, and Peterson, the commissionaire, rushed into the apartment withflushed cheeks and the face of a man who is dazed with astonishment.



“The goose, Mr. Holmes! The goose, sir!” he gasped.



“Eh? What of it, then? Has it returned to life and flapped off throughthe kitchen window?” Holmes twisted himself round upon the sofa to geta fairer view of the man’s excited face.



“See here, sir! See what my wife found in its crop!” He held outhis hand and displayed upon the centre of the palm a brilliantlyscintillating blue stone, rather smaller than a bean in size, but ofsuch purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric point in thedark hollow of his hand.



Sherlock Holmes sat up with a whistle. “By Jove, Peterson!” said he,

“this is treasure trove indeed. I suppose you know what you have got?”



“A diamond, sir? A precious stone. It cuts into glass as though it wereputty.”



“It’s more than a precious stone. It is the precious stone.”



“Not the Countess of Morcar’s blue carbuncle!” I ejaculated.



“Precisely so. I ought to know its size and shape, seeing that I haveread the advertisement about it in The Times every day lately. Itis absolutely unique, and its value can only be conjectured, but thereward offered of £1000 is certainly not within a twentieth part of themarket price.”



“A thousand pounds! Great Lord of mercy!” The commissionaire plumpeddown into a chair, and stared from one to the other of us.



“That is the reward, and I have reason to know that there aresentimental considerations in the background which would induce thecountess to part with half her fortune if she could but recover thegem.”





“It was lost, if I remember aright, at the ‘Hotel Cosmopolitan,’” Iremarked.



“Precisely so, on December 22d, just five days ago. John Horner,

a plumber, was accused of having abstracted it from the lady’sjewel-case. The evidence against him was so strong that the case hasbeen referred to the Assizes. I have some account of the matter here,

I believe.” He rummaged amid his newspapers, glancing over the dates,

until at last he smoothed one out, doubled it over, and read thefollowing paragraph:



“‘Hotel Cosmopolitan Jewel Robbery. John Horner, 26, plumber, wasbrought up upon the charge of having upon the 22d inst. abstracted fromthe jewel-case of the Countess of Morcar the valuable gem known as theblue carbuncle. James Ryder, upper-attendant at the hotel, gave hisevidence to the effect that he had shown Horner up to the dressing-roomof the Countess of Morcar upon the day of the robbery, in order thathe might solder the second bar of the grate, which was loose. He hadremained with Horner some little time, but had finally been calledaway. On returning, he found that Horner had disappeared, that thebureau had been forced open, and that the small morocco casket inwhich, as it afterwards transpired, the countess was accustomed to keepher jewel, was lying empty upon the dressing-table. Ryder instantlygave the alarm, and Horner was arrested the same evening; but the stonecould not be found either upon his person or in his rooms. CatherineCusack, maid to the countess, deposed to having heard Ryder’s cry ofdismay on discovering the robbery, and to having rushed into the room,

where she found matters as described by the last witness. InspectorBradstreet, B division, gave evidence as to the arrest of Horner, whostruggled frantically, and protested his innocence in the strongestterms. Evidence of a previous conviction for robbery having been givenagainst the prisoner, the magistrate refused to deal summarily withthe offence, but referred it to the Assizes. Horner, who had shownsigns of intense emotion during the proceedings, fainted away at theconclusion, and was carried out of court.’



“Hum! So much for the police-court,” said Holmes, thoughtfully, tossingaside the paper. “The question for us now to solve is the sequenceof events leading from a rifled jewel-case at one end to the crop ofa goose in Tottenham Court Road at the other. You see, Watson, ourlittle deductions have suddenly assumed a much more important and lessinnocent aspect. Here is the stone; the stone came from the goose, andthe goose came from Mr. Henry Baker, the gentleman with the bad hatand all the other characteristics with which I have bored you. So nowwe must set ourselves very seriously to finding this gentleman, andascertaining what part he has played in this little mystery. To dothis, we must try the simplest means first, and these lie undoubtedlyin an advertisement in all the evening papers. If this

fails, I shallhave recourse to other methods.”



“What will you say?”



“Give me a pencil and that slip of paper. Now, then: ‘Found at thecorner of Goodge Street, a goose and a black felt hat. Mr. Henry Bakercan have the same by applying at 6.30 this evening at 221B,

Baker Street.’ That is clear and concise.”



“Very. But will he see it?”



“Well, he is sure to keep an eye on the papers, since, to a poor man,

the loss was a heavy one. He was clearly so scared by his mischancein breaking the window and by the approach of Peterson, that hethought of nothing but flight; but since then he must have bitterlyregretted the impulse which caused him to drop his bird. Then, again,

the introduction of his name will cause him to see it, for every onewho knows him will direct his attention to it. Here you are, Peterson,

run down to the advertising agency, and have this put in the eveningpapers.”



“In which, sir?”



“Oh, in the Globe, Star, Pall Mall, St. James’s, EveningNews, Standard, Echo, and any others that occur to you.”









“Very well, sir. And this stone?”



“Ah, yes, I shall keep the stone. Thank you. And, I say, Peterson,

just buy a goose on your way back, and leave it here with me, for wemust have one to give to this gentleman in place of the one which yourfamily is now devouring.”



When the commissionaire had gone, Holmes took up the stone and heldit against the light. “It’s a bonny thing,” said he. “Just see how itglints and sparkles. Of course it is a nucleus and focus of crime.

Every good stone is. They are the devil’s pet baits. In the larger andolder jewels every facet may stand for a bloody deed. This stone is notyet twenty years old. It was found in the banks of the Amoy River inSouthern China, and is remarkable in having every characteristic of thecarbuncle, save that it is blue in shade, instead of ruby red. In spiteof its youth, it has already a sinister history. There have been twomurders, a vitriol-throwing, a suicide, and several robberies broughtabout for the sake of this forty-grain weight of crystallized charcoal.

Who would think that so pretty a toy would be a purveyor to the gallowsand the prison? I’ll lock it up in my strong box now, and drop a lineto the countess to say that we have it.”



“Do you think that this man Horner is innocent?”



“I cannot tell.”



“Well, then, do you imagine that this other one, Henry Baker, hadanything to do with the matter?”



“It is, I think, much more likely that Henry Baker is an absolutelyinnocent man, who had no idea that the bird which he was carrying wasof considerably more value than if it were made of solid gold. That,

however, I shall determine by a very simple test, if we have an answerto our advertisement.”



“And you can do nothing until then?”



“Nothing.”



“In that case I shall continue my professional round. But I shall comeback in the evening at the hour you have mentioned, for I should liketo see the solution of so tangled a business.”



“Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I believe.

By-the-way, in view of recent occurrences, perhaps I ought to ask Mrs.

Hudson to examine its crop.”



I had been delayed at a case, and it was a little after half-pastsix when I found myself in Baker Street once more. As I approachedthe house I saw a tall man in a Scotch bonnet with a coat which wasbuttoned up to his chin, waiting outside in the bright semicircle whichwas thrown from the fanlight. Just as I arrived, the door was opened,

and we were shown up together to Holmes’s room.



“Mr. Henry Baker, I believe,” said he, rising from his arm-chair, andgreeting his visitor with the easy air of geniality which he could soreadily assume. “Pray take this chair by the fire, Mr. Baker. It is acold night, and I observe that your circulation is more adapted forsummer than for winter. Ah, Watson, you have just come at the righttime. Is that your hat, Mr. Baker?”



“Yes, sir, that is undoubtedly my hat.”



He was a large man, with rounded shoulders, a massive head, and abroad, intelligent face, sloping down to a pointed beard of grizzledbrown. A touch of red in nose and cheeks, with a slight tremor of hisextended hand, recalled Holmes’s surmise as to his habits. His rustyblack frock-coat was buttoned right up in front, with the collar turnedup, and his lank wrists protruded from his sleeves without a sign ofcuff or shirt. He spoke in a slow staccato fashion, choosing his wordswith care, and gave the impression generally of a man of learning andletters who had had ill-usage at the hands of fortune.



“We have retained these things for some days,” said Holmes, “because weexpected to see an advertisement from you giving your address. I am ata loss to know now why you did not advertise.”



Our visitor gave a rather shamefaced laugh. “Shillings have not beenso plentiful with me as they once were,” he remarked. “I had no doubtthat the gang of roughs who assaulted me had carried off both my hatand the bird. I did not care to spend more money in a hopeless attemptat recovering them.”



“Very naturally. By-the-way, about the bird, we were compelled to eatit.”



“To eat it!” Our visitor half rose from his chair in his excitement.



“Yes, it would have been of no use to any one had we not done so. ButI presume that this other goose upon the sideboard, which is about thesame weight and perfectly fresh, will answer your purpose equally well?”



“Oh, certainly, certainly;” answered Mr. Baker, with a sigh of relief.



“Of course, we still have the feathers, legs, crop, and so on of yourown bird, so if you wish—”



The man burst into a hearty laugh. “They might be useful to me asrelics of my adventure,” said he, “but beyond that I can hardly seewhat use the disjecta membra of my late acquaintance are going to beto me. No, sir, I think that, with your permission, I will confine myattentions to the excellent bird which I perceive upon the sideboard.”



Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of hisshoulders.



“There is your hat, then, and there your bird,” said he. “By-the-way,

would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I amsomewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better growngoose.”



“Certainly, sir,” said Baker, who had risen and tucked his newly-gainedproperty under his arm. “There are a few of us who frequent the ‘AlphaInn,’ near the Museum—we are to be found in the Museum itself duringthe day, you understand. This year our good host, Windigate by name,

instituted a goose club, by which, on consideration of some few penceevery week, we were each to receive a bird at Christmas. My pence wereduly paid, and the rest is familiar to you. I am much indebted to you,

sir, for a Scotch bonnet is fitted neither to my years nor my gravity.”With a comical pomposity of manner he bowed solemnly to both of us andstrode off upon his way.



“So much for Mr. Henry Baker,” said Holmes, when he had closed the doorbehind him. “It is quite certain that he knows nothing whatever aboutthe matter. Are you hungry, Watson?”



“Not particularly.”



“Then I suggest that we turn our dinner into a supper, and follow upthis clew while it is still hot.”



“By all means.”



It was a bitter night, so we drew on our ulsters and wrapped cravatsabout our throats. Outside, the stars were shining coldly in acloudless sky, and the breath of the passers-by blew out into smokelike so many pistol shots. Our footfalls rang out crisply and loudlyas we swung through the Doctors’ quarter, Wimpole Street, HarleyStreet, and so through Wigmore Street into Oxford Street. In a quarterof an hour we were in Bloomsbury at the “Alpha Inn,” which is a smallpublic-house at the corner of one of the streets which runs down intoHolborn. Holmes pushed open the door of the private bar, and orderedtwo glasses of beer from the ruddy-faced, white-aproned landlord.



“Your beer should be excellent if it is as good as your geese,” said he.



“My geese!” The man seemed surprised.



“Yes. I was speaking only half an hour ago to Mr. Henry Baker, who wasa member of your goose club.”



“Ah! yes, I see. But you see, sir, them’s not our geese.”



“Indeed! Whose, then?”



“Well, I got the two dozen from a salesman in Covent Garden.”



“Indeed? I know some of them. Which was it?”



“Breckinridge is his name.”





“Ah! I don’t know him. Well, here’s your good health, landlord, andprosperity to your house. Good-night?”



“Now for Mr. Breckinridge,” he continued, buttoning up his coat, as wecame out into the frosty air. “Remember, Watson, that though we haveso homely a thing as a goose at one end of this chain, we have at theother a man who will certainly get seven years’ penal servitude unlesswe can establish his innocence. It is possible that our inquiry may butconfirm his guilt; but, in any case, we have a line of investigationwhich has been missed by the police, and which a singular chance hasplaced in our hands. Let us follow it out to the bitter end. Faces tothe south, then, and quick march!”



We passed across Holborn, down Endell Street, and so through a zigzagof slums to Covent Garden Market. One of the largest stalls bore thename of Breckinridge upon it, and the proprietor, a horsey-looking man,

with a sharp face and trim side-whiskers, was helping a boy to put upthe shutters.



“Good-evening. It’s a cold night,” said Holmes.



The salesman nodded, and shot a questioning glance at my companion.



“Sold out of geese, I see,” continued Holmes, pointing at the bareslabs of marble.



“Let you have 500 to-morrow morning.”



“That’s no good.”



“Well, there are some on the stall with the gas-flare.”



“Ah, but I was recommended to you.”



“Who by?”



“The landlord of the ‘Alpha.’”



“Oh, yes; I sent him a couple of dozen.”



“Fine birds they were, too. Now where did you get them from?”



To my surprise the question provoked a burst of anger from the salesman.



“Now, then, mister,” said he, with his head cocked and his armsakimbo, “what are you driving at? Let’s have it straight, now.”



“It is straight enough. I should like to know who sold you the geesewhich you supplied to the ‘Alpha.’”



“Well, then, I sha’n’t tell you. So now!”



“Oh, it is a matter of no importance; but I don’t know why you shouldbe so warm over such a trifle.”



“Warm! You’d be as warm, maybe, if you were as pestered as I am. WhenI pay good money for a good article there should be an end of thebusiness; but it’s ‘Where are the geese?’ and ‘Who did you sell thegeese to?’ and ‘What will you take for the geese?’ One would think theywere the only geese in the world, to hear the fuss that is made overthem.”



“Well, I have no connection with any other people who have been makinginquiries,” said Holmes, carelessly. “If you won’t tell us the bet isoff, that is all. But I’m always ready to back my opinion on a matterof fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the bird I ate is country bred.”



“Well, then, you’ve lost your fiver, for it’s town bred,” snapped thesalesman.



“It’s nothing of the kind.”



“I say it is.”



“I don’t believe it.”



“D’you think you know more about fowls than I, who have handled themever since I was a nipper? I tell you, all those birds that went to the‘Alpha’ were town bred.”



“You’ll never persuade me to believe that.”



“Will you bet, then?”



“It’s merely taking your money, for I know that I am right. But I’llhave a sovereign on with you, just to teach you not to be obstinate.”



The salesman chuckled grimly. “Bring me the books, Bill,” said he.



The small boy brought round a small thin volume and a greatgreasy-backed one, laying them out together beneath the hanging lamp.





“Now then, Mr. Cocksure,” said the salesman, “I thought that I was outof geese, but before I finish you’ll find that there is still one leftin my shop. You see this little book?”



“Well?”



“That’s the list of the folk from whom I buy. D’you see? Well, then,

here on this page are the country folk, and the numbers after theirnames are where their accounts are in the big ledger. Now, then!

You see this other page in red ink? Well, that is a list of my townsuppliers. Now, look at that third name. Just read it out to me.”



“Mrs. Oakshott, 117, Brixton Road—249,” read Holmes.



“Quite so. Now turn that up in the ledger.”



Holmes turned to the page indicated. “Here you are, ‘Mrs. Oakshott,

117, Brixton Road, egg and poultry supplier.’”



“Now, then, what’s the last entry?”



“‘December 22. Twenty-four geese at 7s. 6d.’”



“Quite so. There you are. And underneath?”



“‘Sold to Mr. Windigate of the ‘Alpha,’ at 12s.’”



“What have you to say now?”



Sherlock Holmes looked deeply chagrined. He drew a sovereign from hispocket and threw it down upon the slab, turning away with the air ofa man whose disgust is too deep for words. A few yards off he stoppedunder a lamp-post, and laughed in the hearty, noiseless fashion whichwas peculiar to him.



“When you see a man with whiskers of that cut and the ‘pink ‘un’protruding out of his pocket, you can always draw him by a bet,” saidhe. “I dare say that if I had put £100 down in front of him, that manwould not have given me such complete information as was drawn fromhim by the idea that he was doing me on a wager. Well, Watson, weare, I fancy, nearing the end of our quest, and the only point whichremains to be determined is whether we should go on to this Mrs.

Oakshott to-night, or whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It isclear from what that surly fellow said that there are others besidesourselves who are anxious about the matter, and I should—”



His remarks were suddenly cut short by a loud hubbub which broke outfrom the stall which we had just left. Turning round we saw a littlerat-faced fellow standing in the centre of the circle of yellow lightwhich was thrown by the swinging lamp, while Breckinridge the salesman,

framed in the door of his stall, was shaking his fists fiercely at thecringing figure.



“I’ve had enough of you and your geese,” he shouted. “I wish you wereall at the devil together. If you come pestering me any more with yoursilly talk I’ll set the dog at you. You bring Mrs. Oakshott here andI’ll answer her, but what have you to do with it? Did I buy the geeseoff you?”



“No; but one of them was mine all the same,” whined the little man.



“Well, then, ask Mrs. Oakshott for it.”



“She told me to ask you.”



“Well, you can ask the King of Proosia, for all I care. I’ve had enoughof it. Get out of this!” He rushed fiercely forward, and the inquirerflitted away into the darkness.



“Ha! this may save us a visit to Brixton Road,” whispered Holmes. “Comewith me, and we will see what is to be made of this fellow.” Stridingthrough the scattered knots of people who lounged round the flaringstalls, my companion speedily overtook the little man and touched himupon the shoulder. He sprang round, and I could see in the gaslightthat every vestige of color had been driven from his face.



“Who are you, then? What do you want?” he asked, in a quavering voice.



“You will excuse me,” said Holmes, blandly, “but I could not helpoverhearing the questions which you put to the salesman just now. Ithink that I could be of assistance to you.”



“You? Who are you? How could you know anything of the matter?”





“My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what otherpeople don’t know.”



“But you can know nothing of this?”



“Excuse me, I know everything of it. You are endeavoring to trace somegeese which were sold by Mrs. Oakshott, of Brixton Road, to a salesmannamed Breckinridge, by him in turn to Mr. Windigate, of the ‘Alpha,’and by him to his club, of which Mr. Henry Baker is a member.”



“Oh, sir, you are the very man whom I have longed to meet,” cried thelittle fellow, with outstretched hands and quivering fingers. “I canhardly explain to you how interested I am in this matter.”



Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. “In that casewe had better discuss it in a cosey room rather than in this windsweptmarket-place,” said he. “But pray tell me, before we go farther, who itis that I have the pleasure of assisting.”



The man hesitated for an instant. “My name is John Robinson,” heanswered, with a sidelong glance.



“No, no; the real name,” said Holmes, sweetly. “It is always awkwarddoing business with an alias.”



A flush sprang to the white cheeks of the stranger. “Well, then,” saidhe, “my real name is James Ryder.”



“Precisely so. Head attendant at the ‘Hotel Cosmopolitan.’ Pray stepinto the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you everything which youwould wish to know.”



The little man stood glancing from one to the other of us withhalf-frightened, half-hopeful eyes, as one who is not sure whether heis on the verge of a windfall or of a catastrophe. Then he stepped intothe cab, and in half an hour we were back in the sitting-room at BakerStreet. Nothing had been said during our drive, but the high, thinbreathing of our new companion, and the claspings and unclaspings ofhis hands, spoke of the nervous tension within him.



“Here we are!” said Holmes, cheerily, as we filed into the room. “Thefire looks very seasonable in this weather. You look cold, Mr. Ryder.

Pray take the basket-chair. I will just put on my slippers before wesettle this little matter of yours. Now, then! You want to know whatbecame of those geese?”



“Yes, sir.”



“Or rather, I fancy, of that goose. It was one bird, I imagine, inwhich you were interested—white, with a black bar across the tail.”



Ryder quivered with emotion. “Oh, sir,” he cried, “can you tell mewhere it went to?”



“It came here.”



“Here?”



“Yes, and a most remarkable bird it proved. I don’t wonder that youshould take an interest in it. It laid an egg after it was dead—thebonniest, brightest little blue egg that ever was seen. I have it herein my museum.”



Our visitor staggered to his feet and clutched the mantel-piece withhis right hand. Holmes unlocked his strong-box, and held up the bluecarbuncle, which shone out like a star, with a cold, brilliant,

many-pointed radiance. Ryder stood glaring with a drawn face, uncertainwhether to claim or to disown it.



“The game’s up, Ryder,” said Holmes, quietly. “Hold up, man, or you’llbe into the fire! Give him an arm back into his chair, Watson. He’s notgot blood enough to go in for felony with impunity. Give him a dash ofbrandy. So! Now he looks a little more human. What a shrimp it is, tobe sure!”



For a moment he had staggered and nearly fallen, but the brandy broughta tinge of color into his cheeks, and he sat staring with frightenedeyes at his accuser.



“I have almost every link in my hands, and all the proofs which I couldpossibly need, so there is little which you need tell me. Still, thatlittle may as well be cleared up to make the case complete. You hadheard, Ryder, of this blue stone of the Countess of Morcar’s?”





“It was Catherine Cusack who told me of it,” said he, in a cracklingvoice.



“I see—her ladyship’s waiting-maid. Well, the temptation of suddenwealth so easily acquired was too much for you, as it has been forbetter men before you; but you were not very scrupulous in the meansyou used. It seems to me, Ryder, that there is the making of a verypretty villain in you. You knew that this man Horner, the plumber, hadbeen concerned in some such matter before, and that suspicion wouldrest the more readily upon him. What did you do, then? You made somesmall job in my lady’s room—you and your confederate Cusack—and youmanaged that he should be the man sent for. Then, when he had left, yourifled the jewel-case, raised the alarm, and had this unfortunate manarrested. You then—”



Ryder threw himself down suddenly upon the rug and clutched at mycompanion’s knees. “For God’s sake, have mercy!” he shrieked. “Thinkof my father! of my mother! It would break their hearts. I never wentwrong before! I never will again. I swear it. I’ll swear it on a Bible.

Oh, don’t bring it into court! For Christ’s sake, don’t!”



“Get back into your chair!” said Holmes, sternly. “It is very well tocringe and crawl now, but you thought little enough of this poor Hornerin the dock for a crime of which he knew nothing.”



“I will fly, Mr. Holmes. I will leave the country, sir. Then the chargeagainst him will break down.”



“Hum! We will talk about that. And now let us hear a true account ofthe next act. How came the stone into the goose, and how came the gooseinto the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies your only hopeof safety.”







“‘HAVE MERCY!’ HE SHRIEKED”













Ryder passed his tongue over his parched lips. “I will tell you itjust as it happened, sir,” said he. “When Horner had been arrested, itseemed to me that it would be best for me to get away with the stoneat once, for I did not know at what moment the police might not takeit into their heads to search me and my room. There was no place aboutthe hotel where it would be safe. I went out, as if on some commission,

and I made for my sister’s house. She had married a man named Oakshott,

and lived in Brixton Road, where she fattened fowls for the market.

All the way there every man I met seemed to me to be a policeman or adetective; and, for all that it was a cold night, the sweat was pouringdown my face before I came to the Brixton Road. My sister asked me whatwas the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that I had beenupset by the jewel robbery at the hotel. Then I went into the back yardand smoked a pipe, and wondered what it would be best to do.



“I had a friend once called Maudsley, who went to the bad, and has justbeen serving his time in Pentonville. One day he had met me, and fellinto talk about the ways of thieves, and how they could get rid of whatthey stole. I knew that he would be true to me, for I knew one or twothings about him; so I made up my mind to go right on to Kilburn, wherehe lived, and take him into my confidence. He would show me how toturn the stone into money. But how to get to him in safety? I thoughtof the agonies I had gone through in coming from the hotel. I mightat any moment be seized and searched, and there would be the stonein my waistcoat pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time,

and looking at the geese which were waddling about round my feet, andsuddenly an idea came into my head which showed me how I could beat thebest detective that ever lived.



“My sister had told me some weeks before that I might have the pick ofher geese for a Christmas present, and I knew that she was always asgood as her word. I would take my goose now, and in it I would carrymy stone to Kilburn. There was a little shed in the yard, and behindthis I drove one of the birds—a fine big one, white, with a barredtail. I caught it, and, prying its bill open, I thrust the stone downits throat as far as my finger could reach. The bird gave a gulp, and Ifelt the stone pass along its gullet and down into its crop. But thecreature flapped and struggled, and out came my sister to know whatwas the matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose andfluttered off among the others.



“‘Whatever were you doing with that bird, Jem?’ says she.



“‘Well,’ said I, ‘you said you’d give me one for Christmas, and I wasfeeling which was the fattest.’



“‘Oh,’ says she, ‘we’ve set yours aside for you—Jem’s bird, we callit. It’s the big white one over yonder. There’s twenty-six of them,

which makes one for you, and one for us, and two dozen for the market.’



“‘Thank you, Maggie,’ says I; ‘but if it is all the same to you, I’drather have that one I was handling just now.’



“‘The other is a good three pound heavier,’ said she, ‘and we fattenedit expressly for you.’



“‘Never mind. I’ll have the other, and I’ll take it now,’ said I.



“‘Oh, just as you like,’ said she, a little huffed. ‘Which is it youwant, then?’



“‘That white one with the barred tail, right in the middle of theflock.’



“‘Oh, very well. Kill it and take it with you.’



“Well, I did what she said, Mr. Holmes, and I carried the bird all theway to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was a man thatit was easy to tell a thing like that to. He laughed until he choked,

and we got a knife and opened the goose. My heart turned to water, forthere was no sign of the stone, and I knew that some terrible mistakehad occurred. I left the bird, rushed back to my sister’s, and hurriedinto the back yard. There was not a bird to be seen there.



“‘Where are they all, Maggie?’ I cried.



“‘Gone to the dealer’s, Jem.’



“‘Which dealer’s?’



“‘Breckinridge, of Covent Garden.’



“‘But was there another with a barred tail?’ I asked, ‘the same as theone I chose?’









“‘Yes, Jem; there were two barred-tailed ones, and I could never tellthem apart.’



“Well, then, of course I saw it all, and I ran off as hard as my feetwould carry me to this man Breckinridge; but he had sold the lot atonce, and not one word would he tell me as to where they had gone. Youheard him yourselves to-night. Well, he has always answered me likethat. My sister thinks that I am going mad. Sometimes I think that Iam myself. And now—and now I am myself a branded thief, without everhaving touched the wealth for which I sold my character. God help me!

God help me!” He burst into convulsive sobbing, with his face buried inhis hands.



There was a long silence, broken only by his heavy breathing, and bythe measured tapping of Sherlock Holmes’s finger-tips upon the edge ofthe table. Then my friend rose and threw open the door.



“Get out!” said he.



“What, sir! Oh, heaven bless you!”



“No more words. Get out!”



And no more words were needed. There was a rush, a clatter upon thestairs, the bang of a door, and the crisp rattle of running footfallsfrom the street.



“After all, Watson,” said Holmes, reaching up his hand for his claypipe, “I am not retained by the police to supply their deficiencies. IfHorner were in danger it would be another thing; but this fellow willnot appear against him, and the case must collapse. I suppose that I amcommuting a felony, but it is just possible that I am saving a soul.

This fellow will not go wrong again; he is too terribly frightened.

Send him to jail now, and you make him a jail-bird for life. Besides,

it is the season of forgiveness. Chance has put in our way a mostsingular and whimsical problem, and its solution is its own reward.

If you will have the goodness to touch the bell, doctor, we willbegin another investigation, in which, also, a bird will be the chieffeature.”







Adventure VIIITHE ADVENTURE OF THE SPECKLED BAND











ON glancing over my notes of the seventy odd cases in which I haveduring the last eight years studied the methods of my friend SherlockHolmes, I find many tragic, some comic, a large number merely strange,

but none commonplace; for, working as he did rather for the love of hisart than for the acquirement of wealth, he refused to associate himselfwith any investigation which did not tend towards the unusual, and eventhe fantastic. Of all these varied cases, however, I cannot recall anywhich presented more singular features than that which was associatedwith the well-known Surrey family of the Roylotts of Stoke Moran. Theevents in question occurred in the early days of my association withHolmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors in Baker Street. Itis possible that I might have placed them upon record before, but apromise of secrecy was made at the time, from which I have only beenfreed during the last month by the untimely death of the lady to whomthe pledge was given. It is perhaps as well that the facts should nowcome to light, for I have reasons to know that there are wide-spreadrumors as to the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott which tend to make thematter even more terrible than the truth.







It was early in April in the year ’83 that I woke one morning to findSherlock Holmes standing, fully dressed, by the side of my bed. He wasa late riser as a rule, and as the clock on the mantel-piece showedme that it was only a quarter past seven, I blinked up at him in somesurprise, and perhaps just a little resentment, for I was myselfregular in my habits.







“Very sorry to knock you up, Watson,” said he, “but it’s the common lotthis morning. Mrs. Hudson has been knocked up, she retorted upon me,

and I on you.”



“What is it, then—a fire?”



“No; a client. It seems that a young lady has arrived in a considerablestate of excitement, who insists upon seeing me. She is waiting now inthe sitting-room. Now, when young ladies wander about the metropolisat this hour of the morning, and knock sleepy people up out of theirbeds, I presume that it is something very pressing which they have tocommunicate. Should it prove to be an interesting case, you would, I amsure, wish to follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that Ishould call you and give you the chance.”



“My dear fellow, I would not miss it for anything.”



I had no keener pleasure than in following Holmes in his professionalinvestigations, and in admiring the rapid deductions, as swift asintuitions, and yet always founded on a logical basis, with which heunravelled the problems which were submitted to him. I rapidly threw onmy clothes, and was ready in a few minutes to accompany my friend downto the sitting-room. A lady dressed in black and heavily veiled, whohad been sitting in the window, rose as we entered.



“Good-morning, madam,” said Holmes, cheerily. “My name is SherlockHolmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson, beforewhom you can speak as freely as before myself. Ha! I am glad to seethat Mrs. Hudson has had the good sense to light the fire. Pray draw upto it, and I shall order you a cup of hot coffee, for I observe thatyou are shivering.”



“It is not cold which makes me shiver,” said the woman, in a low voice,

changing her seat as requested.



“What, then?”



“It is fear, Mr. Holmes. It is terror.” She raised her veil as shespoke, and we could see that she was indeed in a pitiable state ofagitation, her face all drawn and gray, with restless, frightened eyes,

like those of some hunted animal. Her features and figure were those ofa woman of thirty, but her hair was shot with premature gray, and herexpression was weary and haggard. Sherlock Holmes ran her over with oneof his quick, all-comprehensive glances.



“You must not fear,” said he, soothingly, bending forward and pattingher forearm. “We shall soon set matters right, I have no doubt. Youhave come in by train this morning, I see.”



“You know me, then?”



“No, but I observe the second half of a return ticket in the palm ofyour left glove. You must have started early, and yet you had a gooddrive in a dog-cart, along heavy roads, before you reached the station.”



The lady gave a violent start, and stared in bewilderment at mycompanion.



“There is no mystery, my dear madam,” said he, smiling. “The left armof your jacket is spattered with mud in no less than seven places. Themarks are perfectly fresh. There is no vehicle save a dog-cart whichthrows up mud in that way, and then only when you sit on the left-handside of the driver.”



“Whatever your reasons may be, you are perfectly correct,” said she. “Istarted from home before six, reached Leatherhead at twenty past, andcame in by the first train to Waterloo. Sir, I can stand this strain nolonger; I shall go mad if it continues. I have no one to turn to—none,

save only one, who cares for me, and he, poor fellow, can be of littleaid. I have heard of you, Mr. Holmes; I have heard of you from Mrs.

Farintosh, whom you helped in the hour of her sore need. It was fromher that I had your address. Oh, sir, do you not think that you couldhelp me, too, and at least throw a little light through the densedarkness which surrounds me? At present it is out of my power to rewardyou for your services, but in a month or six weeks I shall be married,

with the control of my own income, and then at least you shall notfind me ungrateful.”



Holmes turned to his desk, and unlocking it, drew out a smallcase-book, which he consulted.



“Farintosh,” said he. “Ah yes, I recall the case; it was concerned withan opal tiara. I think it was before your time, Watson. I can only say,

madam, that I shall be happy to devote the same care to your case asI did to that of your friend. As to reward, my profession is its ownreward; but you are at liberty to defray whatever expenses I may be putto, at the time which suits you best. And now I beg that you will laybefore us everything that may help us in forming an opinion upon thematter.”



“Alas!” replied our visitor, “the very horror of my situation liesin the fact that my fears are so vague, and my suspicions depend soentirely upon small points, which might seem trivial to another, thateven he to whom of all others I have a right to look for help andadvice looks upon all that I tell him about it as the fancies of anervous woman. He does not say so, but I can read it from his soothinganswers and averted eyes. But I have heard, Mr. Holmes, that you cansee deeply into the manifold wickedness of the human heart. You mayadvise me how to walk amid the dangers which encompass me.”



“I am all attention, madam.”



“My name is Helen Stoner, and I am living with my step-father, who isthe last survivor of one of the oldest Saxon families in England, theRoylotts of Stoke Moran, on the western border of Surrey.”



Holmes nodded his head. “The name is familiar to me,” said he.



“The family was at one time among the richest in England, and theestates extended over the borders into Berkshire in the north, andHampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four successiveheirs were of a dissolute and wasteful disposition, and the familyruin was eventually completed by a gambler in the days of theRegency. Nothing was left save a few acres of ground, and thetwo-hundred-year-old house, which is itself crushed under a heavymortgage. The last squire dragged out his existence there, livingthe horrible life of an aristocratic pauper; but his only son, mystep-father, seeing that he must adapt himself to the new conditions,

obtained an advance from a relative, which enabled him to take amedical degree, and went out to Calcutta, where, by his professionalskill and his force of character, he established a large practice.

In a fit of anger, however, caused by some robberies which had beenperpetrated in the house, he beat his native butler to death, andnarrowly escaped a capital sentence. As it was, he suffered a longterm of imprisonment, and afterwards returned to England a morose anddisappointed man.



“When Dr. Roylott was in India he married my mother, Mrs. Stoner, theyoung widow of Major-general Stoner, of the Bengal Artillery. My sisterJulia and I were twins, and we were only two years old at the time ofmy mother’s re-marriage. She had a considerable sum of money—not lessthan £1000 a year—and this she bequeathed to Dr. Roylott entirelywhile we resided with him, with a provision that a certain annual sumshould be allowed to each of us in the event of our marriage. Shortlyafter our return to England my mother died—she was killed eight yearsago in a railway accident near Crewe. Dr. Roylott then abandoned hisattempts to establish himself in practice in London, and took us tolive with him in the old ancestral house at Stoke Moran. The moneywhich my mother had left was enough for all our wants, and there seemedto be no obstacle to our happiness.



“But a terrible change came over our step-father about this time.

Instead of making friends and exchanging visits with our neighbors, whohad at first been overjoyed to see a Roylott of Stoke Moran back inthe old family seat, he shut himself up in his house, and seldom cameout save to indulge in ferocious quarrels with whoever might cross hispath. Violence of temper approaching to mania has been hereditary inthe men of the family, and in my step-father’s case it had, I believe,

been intensified by his long residence in the tropics. A series ofdisgraceful brawls took place, two of which ended in the police-court,

until at last he became the terror of the village, and the folkswould fly at his approach, for he is a man of immense strength, andabsolutely uncontrollable in his anger.



“Last week he hurled the local blacksmith over a parapet into a stream,

and it was only by paying over all the money which I could gathertogether that I was able to avert another public exposure. He had nofriends at all save the wandering gypsies, and he would give thesevagabonds leave to encamp upon the few acres of bramble-covered landwhich represent the family estate, and would accept in return thehospitality of their tents, wandering away with them sometimes forweeks on end. He has a passion also for Indian animals, which are sentover to him by a correspondent, and he has at this moment a cheetah anda baboon, which wander freely over his grounds, and are feared by thevillagers almost as much as their master.



“You can imagine from what I say that my poor sister Julia and I had nogreat pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with us, and for along time we did all the work of the house. She was but thirty at thetime of her death, and yet her hair had already begun to whiten, evenas mine has.”



“Your sister is dead, then?”



“She died just two years ago, and it is of her death that I wish tospeak to you. You can understand that, living the life which I havedescribed, we were little likely to see anyone of our own age andposition. We had, however, an aunt, my mother’s maiden sister, MissHonoria Westphail, who lives near Harrow, and we were occasionallyallowed to pay short visits at this lady’s house. Julia went there atChristmas two years ago, and met there a half-pay major of marines,

to whom she became engaged. My step-father learned of the engagementwhen my sister returned, and offered no objection to the marriage; butwithin a fortnight of the day which had been fixed for the wedding, theterrible event occurred which has deprived me of my only companion.”



Sherlock Holmes had been leaning back in his chair with his eyes closedand his head sunk in a cushion, but he half opened his lids now andglanced across at his visitor.



“Pray be precise as to details,” said he.



“It is easy for me to be so, for every event of that dreadful time isseared into my memory. The manor-house is, as I have already said, veryold, and only one wing is now inhabited. The bedrooms in this wing areon the ground floor, the sitting-rooms being in the central block ofthe buildings. Of these bedrooms the first is Dr. Roylott’s, the secondmy sister’s, and the third my own. There is no communication betweenthem, but they all open out into the same corridor. Do I make myselfplain?”



“Perfectly so.”



“The windows of the three rooms open out upon the lawn. That fatalnight Dr. Roylott had gone to his room early, though we knew that hehad not retired to rest, for my sister was troubled by the smell ofthe strong Indian cigars which it was his custom to smoke. She lefther room, therefore, and came into mine, where she sat for some time,

chatting about her approaching wedding. At eleven o’clock she rose toleave me but she paused at the door and looked back.



“‘Tell me, Helen,’ said she, ‘have you ever heard any one whistle inthe dead of the night?’



“‘Never,’ said I.



“‘I suppose that you could not possibly whistle, yourself, in yoursleep?’



“‘Certainly not. But why?’



“‘Because during the last few nights I have always, about three inthe morning, heard a low, clear whistle. I am a light sleeper, and ithas awakened me. I cannot tell where it came from—perhaps from thenext room, perhaps from the lawn. I thought that I would just ask youwhether you had heard it.’





“‘No, I have not. It must be those wretched gypsies in the plantation.’



“‘Very likely. And yet if it were on the lawn, I wonder that you didnot hear it also.’



“‘Ah, but I sleep more heavily than you.’



“‘Well, it is of no great consequence, at any rate.’ She smiled back atme, closed my door, and a few moments later I heard her key turn in thelock.”



“Indeed,” said Holmes. “Was it your custom always to lock yourselves inat night?”



“Always.”



“And why?”



“I think that I mentioned to you that the doctor kept a cheetah and ababoon. We had no feeling of security unless our doors were locked.”



“Quite so. Pray proceed with your statement.”



“I could not sleep that night. A vague feeling of impending misfortuneimpressed me. My sister and I, you will recollect, were twins, and youknow how subtle are the links which bind two souls which are so closelyallied. It was a wild night. The wind was howling outside, and the rainwas beating and splashing against the windows. Suddenly, amid all thehubbub of the gale, there burst forth the wild scream of a terrifiedwoman. I knew that it was my sister’s voice. I sprang from my bed,

wrapped a shawl round me, and rushed into the corridor. As I opened mydoor I seemed to hear a low whistle, such as my sister described, and afew moments later a clanging sound, as if a mass of metal had fallen.

As I ran down the passage, my sister’s door was unlocked, and revolvedslowly upon its hinges. I stared at it horror-stricken, not knowingwhat was about to issue from it. By the light of the corridor-lamp Isaw my sister appear at the opening, her face blanched with terror, herhands groping for help, her whole figure swaying to and fro like thatof a drunkard. I ran to her and threw my arms round her, but at thatmoment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground. Shewrithed as one who is in terrible pain, and her limbs were dreadfullyconvulsed. At first I thought that she had not recognized me, but as Ibent over her she suddenly shrieked out in a voice which I shall neverforget, ‘Oh, my God! Helen! It was the band! The speckled band!’ Therewas something else which she would fain have said, and she stabbed withher finger into the air in the direction of the doctor’s room, but afresh convulsion seized her and choked her words. I rushed out, callingloudly for my step-father, and I met him hastening from his room in hisdressing-gown. When he reached my sister’s side she was unconscious,

and though he poured brandy down her throat and sent for medical aidfrom the village, all efforts were in vain, for she slowly sank anddied without having recovered her consciousness. Such was the dreadfulend of my beloved sister.”



“One moment,” said Holmes; “are you sure about this whistle andmetallic sound? Could you swear to it?”



“That was what the county coroner asked me at the inquiry. It is mystrong impression that I heard it, and yet, among the crash of the galeand the creaking of an old house, I may possibly have been deceived.”



“Was your sister dressed?”



“No, she was in her night-dress. In her right hand was found thecharred stump of a match, and in her left a matchbox.”



“Showing that she had struck a light and looked about her when thealarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did thecoroner come to?”



“He investigated the case with great care, for Dr. Roylott’s conducthad long been notorious in the county, but he was unable to find anysatisfactory cause of death. My evidence showed that the door hadbeen fastened upon the inner side, and the windows were blocked byold-fashioned shutters with broad iron bars, which were secured everynight. The walls were carefully sounded, and were shown to be quitesolid all round, and the flooring was also thoroughly examined, withthe same result. The chimney is wide, but is barred up by four largestaples. It is certain, therefore, that my sister was quite alone whenshe met her end. Besides, there were no marks of any violence upon her.”



“How about poison?”



“The doctors examined her for it, but without success.”



“What do you think that this unfortunate lady died of, then?”



“It is my belief that she died of pure fear and nervous shock, thoughwhat it was that frightened her I cannot imagine.”



“Were there gypsies in the plantation at the time?”



“Yes, there are nearly always some there.”



“Ah, and what did you gather from this allusion to a band—a speckledband?”



“Sometimes I have thought that it was merely the wild talk of

delirium,

sometimes that it may have referred to some band of people, perhaps tothese very gypsies in the plantation. I do not know whether the spottedhandkerchiefs which so many of them wear over their heads might havesuggested the strange adjective which she used.”



Holmes shook his head like a man who is far from being satisfied.



“These are very deep waters,” said he; “pray go on with your narrative.”







“Two years have passed since then, and my life has been until latelylonelier than ever. A month ago, however, a dear friend, whom I haveknown for many years, has done me the honor to ask my hand in marriage.

His name is Armitage—Percy Armitage—the second son of Mr. Armitage,

of Crane Water, near Reading. My step-father has offered no oppositionto the match, and we are to be married in the course of the spring. Twodays ago some repairs were started in the west wing of the building,

and my bedroom wall has been pierced, so that I have had to move intothe chamber in which my sister died, and to sleep in the very bed inwhich she slept. Imagine, then, my thrill of terror when last night,

as I lay awake, thinking over her terrible fate, I suddenly heard inthe silence of the night the low whistle which had been the herald ofher own death. I sprang up and lit the lamp, but nothing was to beseen in the room. I was too shaken to go to bed again, however, so Idressed, and as soon as it was daylight I slipped down, got a dog-cartat the ‘Crown Inn,’ which is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, fromwhence I have come on this morning with the one object of seeing youand asking your advice.”



“You have done wisely,” said my friend. “But have you told me all?”



“Yes, all.”



“Miss Roylott, you have not. You are screening your step-father.”



“Why, what do you mean?”



For answer Holmes pushed back the frill of black lace which fringed thehand that lay upon our visitor’s knee. Five little livid spots, themarks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed upon the white wrist.



“You have been cruelly used,” said Holmes.



The lady colored deeply and covered over her injured wrist. “He is ahard man,” she said, “and perhaps he hardly knows his own strength.”



There was a long silence, during which Holmes leaned his chin upon hishands and stared into the crackling fire.



“This is a very deep business,” he said, at last. “There are a thousanddetails which I should desire to know before I decide upon our courseof action. Yet we have not a moment to lose. If we were to come toStoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for us to see over these roomswithout the knowledge of your step-father?”



“As it happens, he spoke of coming into town to-day upon some mostimportant business. It is probable that he will be away all day, andthat there would be nothing to disturb you. We have a house-keepernow, but she is old and foolish, and I could easily get her out of theway.”



“Excellent. You are not averse to this trip, Watson?”



“By no means.”



“Then we shall both come. What are you going to do yourself?”



“I have one or two things which I would wish to do now that I am intown. But I shall return by the twelve o’clock train, so as to be therein time for your coming.”



“And you may expect us early in the afternoon. I have myself some smallbusiness matters to attend to. Will you not wait and breakfast?”



“No, I must go. My heart is lightened already since I have confidedmy trouble to you. I shall look forward to seeing you again thisafternoon.” She dropped her thick black veil over her face and glidedfrom the room.



“And what do you think of it all, Watson?” asked Sherlock Holmes,

leaning back in his chair.



“It seems to me to be a most dark and sinister business.”



“Dark enough and sinister enough.”



“Yet if the lady is correct in saying that the flooring and walls aresound, and that the door, window, and chimney are impassable, then hersister must have been undoubtedly alone when she met her mysteriousend.”



“What becomes, then, of these nocturnal whistles, and what of the verypeculiar words of the dying woman?”



“I cannot think.”



“When you combine the ideas of whistles at night, the presence of aband of gypsies who are on intimate terms with this old doctor, thefact that we have every reason to believe that the doctor has aninterest in preventing his step-daughter’s marriage, the dying allusionto a band, and, finally, the fact that Miss Helen Stoner heard ametallic clang, which might have been caused by one of those metal barswhich secured the shutters falling back into their place, I think thatthere is good ground to think that the mystery may be cleared alongthose lines.”



“But what, then, did the gypsies do?”



“I cannot imagine.”



“I see many objections to any such theory.”



“And so do I. It is precisely for that reason that we are going toStoke Moran this day. I want to see whether the objections are fatal,

or if they may be explained away. But what in the name of the devil!”



The ejaculation had been drawn from my companion by the fact that ourdoor had been suddenly dashed open, and that a huge man had framedhimself in the aperture. His costume was a peculiar mixture of theprofessional and of the agricultural, having a black top-hat, a longfrock-coat, and a pair of high gaiters, with a hunting-crop swinging inhis hand. So tall was he that his hat actually brushed the cross barof the doorway, and his breadth seemed to span it across from side toside. A large face, seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow withthe sun, and marked with every evil passion, was turned from one to theother of us, while his deep-set, bile-shot eyes, and his high, thin,

fleshless nose, gave him somewhat the resemblance to a fierce old birdof prey.



“Which of you is Holmes?” asked this apparition.



“My name, sir; but you have the advantage of me,” said my companion,

quietly.



“I am Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of Stoke Moran.”



“Indeed, doctor,” said Holmes, blandly. “Pray take a seat.”



“I will do nothing of the kind. My step-daughter has been here. I havetraced her. What has she been saying to you?”



“It is a little cold for the time of the year,” said Holmes.



“What has she been saying to you?” screamed the old man, furiously.



“But I have heard that the crocuses promise well,” continued mycompanion, imperturbably.



“Ha! You put me off, do you?” said our new visitor, taking a stepforward and shaking his hunting-crop. “I know you, you scoundrel! Ihave heard of you before. You are Holmes, the meddler.”



My friend smiled.



“Holmes, the busybody!”



His smile broadened.



“Holmes, the Scotland-yard Jack-in-office!”



Holmes chuckled heartily. “Your conversation is most entertaining,”said he. “When you go out close the door, for there is a decideddraught.”



“I will go when I have said my say. Don’t you dare to meddle with myaffairs. I know that Miss Stoner has been here. I traced her! I am adangerous man to fall foul of! See here.” He stepped swiftly forward,

seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with his huge brown hands.



“See that you keep yourself out of my grip,” he snarled, and hurlingthe twisted poker into the fireplace, he strode out of the room.



“He seems a very amiable person,” said Holmes, laughing. “I am notquite so bulky, but if he had remained I might have shown him that mygrip was not much more feeble than his own.” As he spoke he picked upthe steel poker, and with a sudden effort straightened it out again.



“Fancy his having the insolence to confound me with the officialdetective force! This incident gives zest to our investigation,

however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer fromher imprudence in allowing this brute to trace her. And now, Watson,

we shall order breakfast, and afterwards I shall walk down to Doctors’Commons, where I hope to get some data which may help us in thismatter.”







It was nearly one o’clock when Sherlock Holmes returned from hisexcursion. He held in his hand a sheet of blue paper, scrawled overwith notes and figures.



“I have seen the will of the deceased wife,” said he. “To determineits exact meaning I have been obliged to work out the present pricesof the investments with which it is concerned. The total income, whichat the time of the wife’s death was little short of £1100, is now,

through the fall in agricultural prices, not more than £750. Eachdaughter can claim an income of £250, in case of marriage. It isevident, therefore, that if both girls had married, this beauty wouldhave had a mere pittance, while even one of them would cripple him toa very serious extent. My morning’s work has not been wasted, since ithas proved that he has the very strongest motives for standing in theway of anything of the sort. And now, Watson, this is too serious fordawdling, especially as the old man is aware that we are interestingourselves in his affairs; so if you are ready, we shall call a cab anddrive to Waterloo. I should be very much obliged if you would slip yourrevolver into your pocket. An Eley’s No. 2 is an excellent argumentwith gentlemen who can twist steel pokers into knots. That and atooth-brush are, I think, all that we need.”



At Waterloo we were fortunate in catching a train for Leatherhead,

where we hired a trap at the station inn, and drove for four or fivemiles through the lovely Surrey lanes. It was a perfect day, witha bright sun and a few fleecy clouds in the heavens. The trees andway-side hedges were just throwing out their first green shoots, andthe air was full of the pleasant smell of the moist earth. To me atleast there was a strange contrast between the sweet promise of thespring and this sinister quest upon which we were engaged. My companionsat in the front of the trap, his arms folded, his hat pulled down overhis eyes, and his chin sunk upon his breast, buried in the deepestthought. Suddenly, however, he started, tapped me on the shoulder, andpointed over the meadows.



“Look there!” said he.



A heavily-timbered park stretched up in a gentle slope, thickening intoa grove at the highest point. From amid the branches there jutted outthe gray gables and high roof-tree of a very old mansion.





“Stoke Moran?” said he.



“Yes, sir, that be the house of Dr. Grimesby Roylott,” remarked thedriver.



“There is some building going on there,” said Holmes; “that is where weare going.”



“There’s the village,” said the driver, pointing to a cluster of roofssome distance to the left; “but if you want to get to the house, you’llfind it shorter to get over this stile, and so by the foot-path overthe fields. There it is, where the lady is walking.”



“And the lady, I fancy, is Miss Stoner,” observed Holmes, shading hiseyes. “Yes, I think we had better do as you suggest.”



We got off, paid our fare, and the trap rattled back on its way toLeatherhead.



“I thought it as well,” said Holmes, as we climbed the stile, “thatthis fellow should think we had come here as architects, or on somedefinite business. It may stop his gossip. Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner.

You see that we have been as good as our word.”



Our client of the morning had hurried forward to meet us with a facewhich spoke her joy. “I have been waiting so eagerly for you,” shecried, shaking hands with us warmly. “All has turned out splendidly.

Dr. Roylott has gone to town, and it is unlikely that he will be backbefore evening.”



“We have had the pleasure of making the doctor’s acquaintance,” saidHolmes, and in a few words he sketched out what had occurred. MissStoner turned white to the lips as she listened.



“Good heavens!” she cried, “he has followed me, then.”



“So it appears.”



“He is so cunning that I never know when I am safe from him. What willhe say when he returns?”



“He must guard himself, for he may find that there is some one morecunning than himself upon his track. You must lock yourself up from himto-night. If he is violent, we shall take you away to your aunt’s atHarrow. Now, we must make the best use of our time, so kindly take usat once to the rooms which we are to examine.”



The building was of gray, lichen-blotched stone, with a high centralportion, and two curving wings, like the claws of a crab, thrown outon each side. In one of these wings the windows were broken, andblocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly caved in, apicture of ruin. The

central portion was in little better repair, butthe right-hand block was comparatively modern, and the blinds in thewindows, with the blue smoke curling up from the chimneys, showed thatthis was where the family resided. Some scaffolding had been erectedagainst the end wall, and the stone-work had been broken into, butthere were no signs of any workmen at the moment of our visit. Holmeswalked slowly up and down the ill-trimmed lawn, and examined with deepattention the outsides of the windows.



“This, I take it, belongs to the room in which you used to sleep, thecentre one to your sister’s, and the one next to the main building toDr. Roylott’s chamber?”



“Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one.”



“Pending the alterations, as I understand. By-the-way, there does notseem to be any very pressing need for repairs at that end wall.”



“There were none. I believe that it was an excuse to move me from myroom.”



“Ah! that is suggestive. Now, on the other side of this narrow wingruns the corridor from which these three rooms open. There are windowsin it, of course?”



“Yes, but very small ones. Too narrow for any one to pass through.”



“As you both locked your doors at night, your rooms were unapproachablefrom that side. Now, would you have the kindness to go into your roomand bar your shutters.”







Miss Stoner did so, and Holmes, after a careful examination throughthe open window, endeavored in every way to force the shutter open,

but without success. There was no slit through which a knife could bepassed to raise the bar. Then with his lens he tested the hinges, butthey were of solid iron, built firmly into the massive masonry. “Hum!”said he, scratching his chin in some perplexity; “my theory certainlypresents some difficulties. No one could pass these shutters if theywere bolted. Well, we shall see if the inside throws any light upon thematter.”



A small side door led into the whitewashed corridor from which thethree bedrooms opened. Holmes refused to examine the third chamber,

so we passed at once to the second, that in which Miss Stoner was nowsleeping, and in which her sister had met with her fate. It was ahomely little room, with a low ceiling and a gaping fireplace, afterthe fashion of old country-houses. A brown chest of drawers stoodin one corner, a narrow white-counterpaned bed in another, and adressing-table on the left-hand side of the window. These articles,

with two small wicker-work chairs, made up all the furniture in theroom, save for a square of Wilton carpet in the centre. The boardsround and the panelling of the walls were of brown, worm-eaten oak, soold and discolored that it may have dated from the original building ofthe house. Holmes drew one of the chairs into a corner and sat silent,

while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down, taking inevery detail of the apartment.



“Where does that bell communicate with?” he asked, at last, pointing toa thick bell-rope which hung down beside the bed, the tassel actuallylying upon the pillow.



“It goes to the house-keeper’s room.”



“It looks newer than the other things?”



“Yes, it was only put there a couple of years ago.”



“Your sister asked for it, I suppose?”



“No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what wewanted for ourselves.”



“Indeed, it seemed unnecessary to put so nice a bell-pull there. Youwill excuse me for a few minutes while I satisfy myself as to thisfloor.” He threw himself down upon his face with his lens in his hand,

and crawled swiftly backward and forward, examining minutely the cracksbetween the boards. Then he did the same with the wood-work with whichthe chamber was panelled. Finally he walked over to the bed, and spentsome time in staring at it, and in running his eye up and down thewall. Finally he took the bell-rope in his hand and gave it a brisk tug.



“Why, it’s a dummy,” said he.



“Won’t it ring?”



“No, it is not even attached to a wire. This is very interesting. Youcan see now that it is fastened to a hook just above where the littleopening for the ventilator is.”



“How very absurd! I never noticed that before.”



“Very strange!” muttered Holmes, pulling at the rope. “There are one ortwo very singular points about this room. For example, what a fool abuilder must be to open a ventilator into another room, when, with thesame trouble, he might have communicated with the outside air!”



“That is also quite modern,” said the lady.



“Done about the same time as the bell-rope?” remarked Holmes.



“Yes, there were several little changes carried out about that time.”



“They seem to have been of a most interesting character—dummybell-ropes, and ventilators which do not ventilate. With yourpermission, Miss Stoner, we shall now carry our researches into theinner apartment.”



Dr. Grimesby Roylott’s chamber was larger than that of hisstep-daughter, but was as plainly furnished. A camp-bed, a small woodenshelf full of books, mostly of a technical character, an arm-chairbeside the bed, a plain wooden chair against the wall, a round table,

and a large iron safe were the principal things which met the eye.

Holmes walked slowly round and examined each and all of them with thekeenest interest.



“What’s in here?” he asked, tapping the safe.





“My step-father’s business papers.”



“Oh! you have seen inside, then?”



“Only once, some years ago. I remember that it was full of papers.”



“There isn’t a cat in it, for example?”



“No. What a strange idea!”



“Well, look at this!” He took up a small saucer of milk which stood onthe top of it.



“No; we don’t keep a cat. But there is a cheetah and a baboon.”



“Ah, yes, of course! Well, a cheetah is just a big cat, and yet asaucer of milk does not go very far in satisfying its wants, I daresay. There is one point which I should wish to determine.” He squatteddown in front of the wooden chair, and examined the seat of it with thegreatest attention.



“Thank you. That is quite settled,” said he, rising and putting hislens in his pocket. “Hello! Here is something interesting!”



The object which had caught his eye was a small dog-lash hung on onecorner of the bed. The lash, however, was curled upon itself, and tiedso as to make a loop of whip-cord.



“What do you make of that, Watson?”



“It’s a common enough lash. But I don’t know why it should be tied.”



“That is not quite so common, is it? Ah, me! it’s a wicked world,

and when a clever man turns his brains to crime it is the worst ofall. I think that I have seen enough now, Miss Stoner, and with yourpermission we shall walk out upon the lawn.”



I had never seen my friend’s face so grim or his brow so dark as itwas when we turned from the scene of this investigation. We had walkedseveral times up and down the lawn, neither Miss Stoner nor myselfliking to break in upon his thoughts before he roused himself from hisreverie.



“It is very essential, Miss Stoner,” said he, “that you shouldabsolutely follow my advice in every respect.”





“I shall most certainly do so.”



“The matter is too serious for any hesitation. Your life may dependupon your compliance.”



“I assure you that I am in your hands.”



“In the first place, both my friend and I must spend the night in yourroom.”



Both Miss Stoner and I gazed at him in astonishment.



“Yes, it must be so. Let me explain. I believe that that is the villageinn over there?”



“Yes, that is the ‘Crown.’”



“Very good. Your windows would be visible from there?”



“Certainly.”



“You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a headache,

when your step-father comes back. Then when you hear him retire forthe night, you must open the shutters of your window, undo the hasp,

put your lamp there as a signal to us, and then withdraw quietly witheverything which you are likely to want into the room which you used tooccupy. I have no doubt that, in spite of the repairs, you could managethere for one night.”



“Oh yes, easily.”



“The rest you will leave in our hands.”



“But what will you do?”



“We shall spend the night in your room, and we shall investigate thecause of this noise which has disturbed you.”



“I believe, Mr. Holmes, that you have already made up your mind,” saidMiss Stoner, laying her hand upon my companion’s sleeve.



“Perhaps I have.”



“Then for pity’s sake tell me what was the cause of my sister’s death.”



“I should prefer to have clearer proofs before I speak.”



“You can at least tell me whether my own thought is correct, and if shedied from some sudden fright.”







“‘GOOD-BYE, AND BE BRAVE’”













“No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some moretangible cause. And now, Miss Stoner, we must leave you, for if Dr.

Roylott returned and saw us, our journey would be in vain. Good-bye,

and be brave, for if you will do what I have told you, you may restassured that we shall soon drive away the dangers that threaten you.”



Sherlock Holmes and I had no difficulty in engaging a bedroom andsitting-room at the “Crown Inn.” They were on the upper floor, andfrom our window we could command a view of the avenue gate, and of theinhabited wing of Stoke Moran Manor House. At dusk we saw Dr. GrimesbyRoylott drive past, his huge form looming up beside the little figureof the lad who drove him. The boy had some slight difficulty in undoingthe heavy iron gates, and we heard the hoarse roar of the doctor’svoice, and saw the fury with which he shook his clinched fists at him.

The trap drove on, and a few minutes later we saw a sudden light springup among the trees as the lamp was lit in one of the sitting-rooms.



“Do you know, Watson,” said Holmes, as we sat together in the gatheringdarkness, “I have really some scruples as to taking you to-night. Thereis a distinct element of danger.”



“Can I be of assistance?”



“Your presence might be invaluable.”



“Then I shall certainly come.”



“It is very kind of you.”



“You speak of danger. You have evidently seen more in these rooms thanwas visible to me.”



“No, but I fancy that I may have deduced a little more. I imagine thatyou saw all that I did.”



“I saw nothing remarkable save the bell-rope, and what purpose thatcould answer I confess is more than I can imagine.”



“You saw the ventilator, too?”



“Yes, but I do not think that it is such a very unusual thing to havea small opening between two rooms. It was so small that a rat couldhardly pass through.”



“I knew that we should find a ventilator before ever we came to StokeMoran.”





“My dear Holmes!”



“Oh yes, I did. You remember in her statement she said that her sistercould smell Dr. Roylott’s cigar. Now, of course that suggested at oncethat there must be a communication between the two rooms. It could onlybe a small one, or it would have been remarked upon at the coroner’sinquiry. I deduced a ventilator.”



“But what harm can there be in that?”



“Well, there is at least a curious coincidence of dates. A ventilatoris made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the bed dies. Doesnot that strike you?”



“I cannot as yet see any connection.”



“Did you observe anything very peculiar about that bed?”



“No.”



“It was clamped to the floor. Did you ever see a bed fastened like thatbefore?”



“I cannot say that I have.”



“The lady could not move her bed. It must always be in the samerelative position to the ventilator and to the rope—for so we may callit, since it was clearly never meant for a bell-pull.”



“Holmes,” I cried, “I seem to see dimly what you are hinting at. We areonly just in time to prevent some subtle and horrible crime.”



“Subtle enough and horrible enough. When a doctor does go wrong, he isthe first of criminals. He has nerve and he has knowledge. Palmer andPritchard were among the heads of their profession. This man strikeseven deeper, but I think, Watson, that we shall be able to strikedeeper still. But we shall have horrors enough before the night isover; for goodness’ sake let us have a quiet pipe, and turn our mindsfor a few hours to something more cheerful.”







About nine o’clock the light among the trees was extinguished, and allwas dark in the direction of the Manor House. Two hours passed slowlyaway, and then, suddenly, just at the stroke of eleven, a singlebright light shone out right in front of us.



“That is our signal,” said Holmes, springing to his feet; “it comesfrom the middle window.”



As we passed out he exchanged a few words with the landlord, explainingthat we were going on a late visit to an acquaintance, and that it waspossible that we might spend the night there. A moment later we wereout on the dark road, a chill wind blowing in our faces, and one yellowlight twinkling in front of us through the gloom to guide us on oursombre errand.



There was little difficulty in entering the grounds, for unrepairedbreaches gaped in the old park wall. Making our way among the trees,

we reached the lawn, crossed it, and were about to enter through thewindow, when out from a clump of laurel bushes there darted what seemedto be a hideous and distorted child, who threw itself upon the grasswith writhing limbs, and then ran swiftly across the lawn into thedarkness.



“My God!” I whispered; “did you see it?”



Holmes was for the moment as startled as I. His hand closed like a viceupon my wrist in his agitation. Then he broke into a low laugh, and puthis lips to my ear.



“It is a nice household,” he murmured. “That is the baboon.”



I had forgotten the strange pets which the doctor affected. There wasa cheetah, too; perhaps we might find it upon our shoulders at anymoment. I confess that I felt easier in my mind when, after followingHolmes’s example and slipping off my shoes, I found myself inside thebedroom. My companion noiselessly closed the shutters, moved the lamponto the table, and cast his eyes round the room. All was as we hadseen it in the daytime. Then creeping up to me and making a trumpet ofhis hand, he whispered into my ear again so gently that it was all thatI could do to distinguish the words:



“The least sound would be fatal to our plans.”





I nodded to show that I had heard.



“We must sit without light. He would see it through the ventilator.”



I nodded again.



“Do not go asleep; your very life may depend upon it. Have your pistolready in case we should need it. I will sit on the side of the bed, andyou in that chair.”



I took out my revolver and laid it on the corner of the table.



Holmes had brought up a long thin cane, and this he placed upon the bedbeside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the stump of a candle.

Then he turned down the lamp, and we were left in darkness.



How shall I ever forget that dreadful vigil? I could not hear a sound,

not even the drawing of a breath, and yet I knew that my companionsat open-eyed, within a few feet of me, in the same state of nervoustension in which I was myself. The shutters cut off the least rayof light, and we waited in absolute darkness. From outside came theoccasional cry of a night-bird, and once at our very window a longdrawn cat-like whine, which told us that the cheetah was indeed atliberty. Far away we could hear the deep tones of the parish clock,

which boomed out every quarter of an hour. How long they seemed, thosequarters! Twelve struck, and one and two and three, and still we satwaiting silently

for whatever might befall.



Suddenly there was the momentary gleam of a light up in the directionof the ventilator, which vanished immediately, but was succeeded bya strong smell of burning oil and heated metal. Some one in the nextroom had lit a dark-lantern. I heard a gentle sound of movement, andthen all was silent once more, though the smell grew stronger. For halfan hour I sat with straining ears. Then suddenly another sound becameaudible—a very gentle, soothing sound, like that of a small jet ofsteam escaping continually from a kettle. The instant that we heard it,

Holmes sprang from the bed, struck a match, and lashed furiously withhis cane at the bell-pull.









“You see it, Watson?” he yelled. “You see it?”



But I saw nothing. At the moment when Holmes struck the light I hearda low, clear whistle, but the sudden glare flashing into my weary eyesmade it impossible for me to tell what it was at which my friend lashedso savagely. I could, however, see that his face was deadly pale, andfilled with horror and loathing.



He had ceased to strike, and was gazing up at the ventilator, whensuddenly there broke from the silence of the night the most horriblecry to which I have ever listened. It swelled up louder and louder, ahoarse yell of pain and fear and anger all mingled in the one dreadfulshriek. They say that away down in the village, and even in the distantparsonage, that cry raised the sleepers from their beds. It struck coldto our hearts, and I stood gazing at Holmes, and he at me, until thelast echoes of it had died away into the silence from which it rose.



“What can it mean?” I gasped.



“It means that it is all over,” Holmes answered. “And perhaps, afterall, it is for the best. Take your pistol, and we will enter Dr.

Roylott’s room.”



With a grave face he lit the lamp and led the way down the corridor.

Twice he struck at the chamber door without any reply from within.

Then he turned the handle and entered, I at his heels, with the cockedpistol in my hand.



It was a singular sight which met our eyes. On the table stood adark-lantern with the shutter half open, throwing a brilliant beamof light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar. Beside thistable, on the wooden chair, sat Dr. Grimesby Roylott, clad in a longgray dressing-gown, his bare ankles protruding beneath, and his feetthrust into red heelless Turkish slippers. Across his lap lay the shortstock with the long lash which we had noticed during the day. His chinwas cocked upward and his eyes were fixed in a dreadful, rigid stareat the corner of the ceiling. Round his brow he had a peculiar yellowband, with brownish speckles, which seemed to be bound tightly roundhis head. As we entered he made neither sound nor motion.



“The band! the speckled band!” whispered Holmes.



I took a step forward. In an instant his strange head-gear beganto move, and there reared itself from among his hair the squatdiamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.



“It is a swamp adder!” cried Holmes; “the deadliest snake in India. Hehas died within ten seconds of being bitten. Violence does, in truth,

recoil upon the violent, and the schemer falls into the pit which hedigs for another. Let us thrust this creature back into its den, andwe can then remove Miss Stoner to some place of shelter, and let thecounty police know what has happened.”



As he spoke he drew the dog-whip swiftly from the dead man’s lap, andthrowing the noose round the reptile’s neck, he drew it from its horridperch, and carrying it at arm’s length, threw it into the iron safe,

which he closed upon it.







Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of StokeMoran. It is not necessary that I should prolong a narrative which hasalready run to too great a length, by telling how we broke the sad newsto the terrified girl, how we conveyed her by the morning train to thecare of her good aunt at Harrow, of how the slow process of officialinquiry came to the conclusion that the doctor met his fate whileindiscreetly playing with a dangerous pet. The little which I had yetto learn of the case was told me by Sherlock Holmes as we travelledback next day.



“I had,” said he, “come to an entirely erroneous conclusion, whichshows, my dear Watson, how dangerous it always is to reason frominsufficient data. The presence of the gypsies, and the use of theword ‘band,’ which was used by the poor girl, no doubt to explain theappearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of by the light ofher match, were sufficient to put me upon an entirely wrong scent. Ican only claim the merit that I instantly reconsidered my positionwhen, however, it became clear to me that whatever danger threatenedan occupant of the room could not come either from the window or thedoor. My attention was speedily drawn, as I have already remarked toyou, to this ventilator, and to the bell-rope which hung down to thebed. The discovery that this was a dummy, and that the bed was clampedto the floor, instantly gave rise to the suspicion that the rope wasthere as bridge for something passing through the hole, and comingto the bed. The idea of a snake instantly occurred to me, and whenI coupled it with my knowledge that the doctor was furnished with asupply of creatures from India, I felt that I was probably on the righttrack. The idea of using a form of poison which could not possibly bediscovered by any chemical test was just such a one as would occur to aclever and ruthless man who had had an Eastern training. The rapiditywith which such a poison would take effect would also, from his pointof view, be an advantage. It would be a sharp-eyed coroner, indeed, whocould distinguish the two little dark punctures which would show wherethe poison fangs had done their work. Then I thought of the whistle. Ofcourse he must recall the snake before the morning light revealed it tothe victim. He had trained it, probably by the use of the milk whichwe saw, to return to him when summoned. He would put it through thisventilator at the hour that he thought best, with the certainty that itwould crawl down the rope and land on the bed. It might or might notbite the occupant, perhaps she might escape every night for a week, butsooner or later she must fall a victim.



“I had come to these conclusions before ever I had entered his room.

An inspection of his chair showed me that he had been in the habit ofstanding on it, which of course would be necessary in order that heshould reach the ventilator. The sight of the safe, the saucer of milk,

and the loop of whip-cord were enough to finally dispel any doubtswhich may have remained. The metallic clang heard by Miss Stoner wasobviously caused by her step-father hastily closing the door of hissafe upon its terrible occupant. Having once made up my mind, you knowthe steps which I took in order to put the matter to the proof. Iheard the creature hiss, as I have no doubt that you did also, and Iinstantly lit the light and attacked it.”



“With the result of driving it through the ventilator.”



“And also with the result of causing it to turn upon its master at theother side. Some of the blows of my cane came home, and roused itssnakish temper, so that it flew upon the first person it saw. In thisway I am no doubt indirectly responsible for Dr. Grimesby Roylott’sdeath, and I cannot say that it is likely to weigh very heavily upon myconscience.”







Adventure IXTHE ADVENTURE OF THE ENGINEER’S THUMB











OF all the problems which have been submitted to my friend Mr. SherlockHolmes for solution during the years of our intimacy, there were onlytwo which I was the means of introducing to his notice—that of Mr.

Hatherley’s thumb, and that of Colonel Warburton’s madness. Of thesethe latter may have afforded a finer field for an acute and originalobserver, but the other was so strange in its inception and so dramaticin its details, that it may be the more worthy of being placed uponrecord, even if it gave my friend fewer openings for those deductivemethods of reasoning by which he achieved such remarkable results. Thestory has, I believe, been told more than once in the newspapers, but,

like all such narratives, its effect is much less striking when setforth en bloc in a single half-column of print than when the factsslowly evolve before your own eyes, and the mystery clears graduallyaway as each new discovery furnishes a step which leads on to thecomplete truth. At the time the circumstances made a deep impressionupon me, and the lapse of two years has hardly served to weaken theeffect.







It was in the summer of ’89, not long after my marriage, that theevents occurred which I am now about to summarize. I had returned tocivil practice, and had finally abandoned Holmes in his Baker Streetrooms, although I continually visited him, and occasionally evenpersuaded him to forego his Bohemian habits so far as to come and visitus. My practice had steadily increased, and as I happened to live atno very great distance from Paddington Station, I got a few patientsfrom among the officials. One of these, whom I had cured of a painfuland lingering disease, was never weary of advertising my virtues, andof endeavoring to send me on every sufferer over whom he might have anyinfluence.



One morning, at a little before seven o’clock, I was awakened bythe maid tapping at the door, to announce that two men had comefrom Paddington, and were waiting in the consulting-room. I dressedhurriedly, for I knew by experience that railway cases were seldomtrivial, and hastened down-stairs. As I descended, my old ally, theguard, came out of the room and closed the door tightly behind him.



“I’ve got him here,” he whispered, jerking his thumb over his shoulder;“he’s all right.”



“What is it, then?” I asked, for his manner suggested that it was somestrange creature which he had caged up in my room.



“It’s a new patient,” he whispered. “I thought I’d bring him roundmyself; then he couldn’t slip away. There he is, all safe and sound. Imust go now, doctor; I have my dooties, just the same as you.” And offhe went, this trusty tout, without even giving me time to thank him.



I entered my consulting-room and found a gentleman seated by thetable. He was quietly dressed in a suit of heather tweed, with a softcloth cap, which he had laid down upon my books. Round one of hishands he had a handkerchief wrapped, which was mottled all over withblood-stains. He was young, not more than five-and-twenty, I shouldsay, with a strong, masculine face; but he was exceedingly pale, andgave me the impression of a man who was suffering from some strongagitation, which it took all his strength of mind to control.



“I am sorry to knock you up so early, doctor,” said he, “but I havehad a very serious accident during the night. I came in by train thismorning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I might find adoctor, a worthy fellow very kindly escorted me here. I gave the maid acard, but I see that she has left it upon the side-table.”



I took it up and glanced at it. “Mr. Victor Hatherley, hydraulicengineer,16A, Victoria Street (3d floor).” That was the name,

style, and abode of my morning visitor. “I regret that I have kept youwaiting,” said I, sitting down in my library-chair. “You are freshfrom a night journey, I understand, which is in itself a monotonousoccupation.”



“Oh, my night could not be called monotonous,” said he, and laughed. Helaughed very heartily, with a high, ringing note, leaning back in hischair and shaking his sides. All my medical instincts rose up againstthat laugh.



“Stop it!” I cried; “pull yourself together!” and I poured out somewater from a caraffe.



It was useless, however. He was off in one of those hystericaloutbursts which come upon a strong nature when some great crisis isover and gone. Presently he came to himself once more, very weary andblushing hotly.



“I have been making a fool of myself,” he gasped.



“Not at all. Drink this.” I dashed some brandy into the water, and thecolor began to come back to his bloodless cheeks.



“That’s better!” said he. “And now, doctor, perhaps you would kindlyattend to my thumb, or rather to the place where my thumb used to be.”



He unwound the handkerchief and held out his hand. It gave even myhardened nerves a shudder to look at it. There were four protrudingfingers and a horrid red, spongy surface where the thumb should havebeen. It had been hacked or torn right out from the roots.



“Good heavens!” I cried, “this is a terrible injury. It must have bledconsiderably.”



“Yes, it did. I fainted when it was done, and I think that I must havebeen senseless for a long time. When I came to I found that it wasstill bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very tightlyround the wrist, and braced it up with a twig.”



“Excellent! You should have been a surgeon.”



“It is a question of hydraulics, you see, and came within my ownprovince.”



“This has been done,” said I, examining the wound, “by a very heavy andsharp instrument.”



“A thing like a cleaver,” said he.



“An accident, I presume?”



“By no means.”



“What! a murderous attack?”



“Very murderous indeed.”



“You horrify me.”



I sponged the wound, cleaned it, dressed it, and finally covered itover with cotton wadding and carbolized bandages. He lay back withoutwincing, though he bit his lip from time to time.



“How is that?” I asked, when I had finished.



“Capital! Between your brandy and your bandage, I feel a new man. I wasvery weak, but I have had a good deal to go through.”



“Perhaps you had better not speak of the matter. It is evidently tryingto your nerves.”



“Oh no, not now. I shall have to tell my tale to the police; but,

between ourselves, if it were not for the convincing evidence of thiswound of mine, I should be surprised if they believed my statement; forit is a very extraordinary one, and I have not much in the way of proofwith which to back it up; and, even if they believe me, the clews whichI can give them are so vague that it is a question whether justice willbe done.”



“Ha!” cried I, “if it is anything in the nature of a problem which youdesire to see solved, I should strongly recommend you to come to myfriend Mr. Sherlock Holmes before you go to the official police.”



“Oh, I have heard of that fellow,” answered my visitor, “and I shouldbe very glad if he would take the matter up, though of course I mustuse the official police as well. Would you give me an introduction tohim?”



“I’ll do better. I’ll take you round to him myself.”



“I should be immensely obliged to you.”



“We’ll call a cab and go together. We shall just be in time to have alittle breakfast with him. Do you feel equal to it?”



“Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story.”



“Then my servant will call a cab, and I shall be with you in aninstant.” I rushed up-stairs, explained the matter shortly to mywife, and in five minutes was inside a hansom, driving with my newacquaintance to Baker Street.



Sherlock Holmes was, as I expected, lounging about his sitting-room inhis dressing-gown, reading the agony column of The Times, and smokinghis before-breakfast pipe, which was composed of all the plugs anddottels left from his smokes of the day before, all carefully driedand collected on the corner of the mantel-piece. He received us in hisquietly genial fashion, ordered fresh rashers and eggs, and joined usin a hearty meal. When it was concluded he settled our new acquaintanceupon the sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass ofbrandy-and-water within his reach.



“It is easy to see that your experience has been no common one, Mr.

Hatherley,” said he. “Pray, lie down there and make yourself absolutelyat home. Tell us what you can, but stop when you are tired, and keep upyour strength with a little stimulant.”



“Thank you,” said my patient, “but I have felt another man since thedoctor bandaged me, and I think that your breakfast has completed thecure. I shall take up as little of your valuable time as possible, so Ishall start at once upon my peculiar experiences.”



Holmes sat in his big arm-chair with the weary, heavy-lidded expressionwhich veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat opposite to him,

and we listened in silence to the strange story which our visitordetailed to us.





“You must know,” said he, “that I am an orphan and a bachelor, residingalone in lodgings in London. By profession I am an hydraulic engineer,

and I have had considerable experience of my work during the sevenyears that I was apprenticed to Venner & Matheson, the well-knownfirm, of Greenwich. Two years ago, having served my time, and havingalso come into a fair sum of money through my poor father’s death,

I determined to start in business for myself, and took professionalchambers in Victoria Street.



“I suppose that every one finds his first independent start in businessa dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally so. During twoyears I have had three consultations and one small job, and that isabsolutely all that my profession has brought me. My gross takingsamount to £27 10s. Every day, from nine in the morning until four inthe afternoon, I waited in my little den, until at last my heart beganto sink, and I came to believe that I should never have any practice atall.



“Yesterday, however, just as I was thinking of leaving the office,

my clerk entered to say there was a gentleman waiting who wished tosee me upon business. He brought up a card, too, with the name of‘Colonel Lysander Stark’ engraved upon it. Close at his heels came thecolonel himself, a man rather over the middle size, but of an exceedingthinness. I do not think that I have ever seen so thin a man. His wholeface sharpened away into nose and chin, and the skin of his cheekswas drawn quite tense over his outstanding bones. Yet this emaciationseemed to be his natural habit, and due to no disease, for his eye wasbright, his step brisk, and his bearing assured. He was plainly butneatly dressed, and his age, I should judge, would be nearer forty thanthirty.



“‘Mr. Hatherley?’ said he, with something of a German accent. ‘Youhave been recommended to me, Mr. Hatherley, as being a man who is notonly proficient in his profession, but is also discreet and capable ofpreserving a secret.’



“I bowed, feeling as flattered as any young man would at such anaddress. ‘May I ask who it was who gave me so good a character?’



“‘Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just atthis moment. I have it from the same source that you are both an orphanand a bachelor, and are residing alone in London.’



“‘That is quite correct,’ I answered, ‘but you will excuse me ifI say that I cannot see how all this bears upon my professionalqualifications. I understood that it was on a professional matter thatyou wished to speak to me?’



“‘Undoubtedly so. But you will find that all I say is really to thepoint. I have a professional commission for you, but absolute secrecyis quite essential—absolute secrecy, you understand, and of coursewe may expect that more from a man who is alone than from one who livesin the bosom of his family.’



“‘If I promise to keep a secret,’ said I, ‘you may absolutely dependupon my doing so.’



“He looked very hard at me as I spoke, and it seemed to me that I hadnever seen so suspicious and questioning an eye.



“‘Do you promise, then?’ said he, at last.



“‘Yes, I promise.’



“‘Absolute and complete silence before, during, and after? No referenceto the matter at all, either in word or writing?’



“‘I have already given you my word.’



“‘Very good.’ He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightning acrossthe room, he flung open the door. The passage outside was empty.



“‘That’s all right,’ said he, coming back. ‘I know that clerks aresometimes curious as to their master’s affairs. Now we can talk insafety.’ He drew up his chair very close to mine, and began to stare atme again with the same questioning and thoughtful look.



“A feeling of repulsion, and of something akin to fear had begun torise within me at the strange antics of this fleshless man. Evenmy dread of losing a client could not restrain me from showing myimpatience.



“‘I beg that you will state your business, sir,’ said I; ‘my time is ofvalue.’ Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the words came tomy lips.



“‘How would fifty guineas for a night’s work suit you?’ he asked.



“‘Most admirably.’



“‘I say a night’s work, but an hour’s would be nearer the mark. Isimply want your opinion about a hydraulic stamping machine which hasgot out of gear. If you show us what is wrong we shall soon set itright ourselves. What do you think of such a commission as that?’



“‘The work appears to be light and the pay munificent.’



“‘Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the last train.’



“‘Where to?’



“‘To Eyford, in Berkshire. It is a little place near the borders ofOxfordshire, and within seven miles of Reading. There is a train fromPaddington which would bring you there at about 11.15.’



“‘Very good.’



“‘I shall come down in a carriage to meet you.’



“‘There is a drive, then?’



“‘Yes, our little place is quite out in the country. It is a good sevenmiles from Eyford Station.’



“‘Then we can hardly get there before midnight. I suppose there wouldbe no chance of a train back. I should be compelled to stop the night.’



“‘Yes, we could easily give you a shake-down.’



“‘That is very awkward. Could I not come at some more convenient hour?’



“‘We have judged it best that you should come late. It is to recompenseyou for any inconvenience that we are paying to you, a young andunknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the very heads ofyour profession. Still, of course, if you would like to draw out ofthe business, there is plenty of time to do so.’



“I thought of the fifty guineas, and of how very useful they would beto me. ‘Not at all,’ said I, ‘I shall be very happy to accommodatemyself to your wishes. I should like, however, to understand a littlemore clearly what it is that you wish me to do.’



“‘Quite so. It is very natural that the pledge of secrecy which we haveexacted from you should have aroused your curiosity. I have no wish tocommit you to anything without your having it all laid before you. Isuppose that we are absolutely safe from eavesdroppers?’



“‘Entirely.’



“‘Then the matter stands thus. You are probably aware thatfuller’s-earth is a valuable product, and that it is only found in oneor two places in England?’



“‘I have heard so.’



“‘Some little time ago I bought a small place—a very smallplace—within ten miles of Reading. I was fortunate enough to discoverthat there was a deposit of fuller’s-earth in one of my fields. Onexamining it, however, I found that this deposit was a comparativelysmall one, and that it formed a link between two very much larger onesupon the right and left—both of them, however, in the grounds of myneighbors. These good people were absolutely ignorant that their landcontained that which was quite as valuable as a gold-mine. Naturally,

it was to my interest to buy their land before they discovered its truevalue; but, unfortunately, I had no capital by which I could do this. Itook a few of my friends into the secret, however, and they suggestedthat we should quietly and secretly work our own little deposit, andthat in this way we should earn the money which would enable us to buythe neighboring fields. This we have now been doing for some time, andin order to help us in our operations we erected an hydraulic press.

This press, as I have already explained, has got out of order, and wewish your advice upon the subject. We guard our secret very jealously,

however, and if it once became known that we had hydraulic engineerscoming to our little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, ifthe facts came out, it would be good-bye to any chance of getting thesefields and carrying out our plans. That is why I have made you promiseme that you will not tell a human being that you are going to Eyfordto-night. I hope that I make it all plain?’



“‘I quite follow you,’ said I. ‘The only point which I could notquite understand, was what use you could make of an hydraulic pressin excavating fuller’s-earth, which, as I understand, is dug out likegravel from a pit.’



“‘Ah!’ said he, carelessly, ‘we have our own process. We compressthe earth into bricks, so as to remove them without revealing whatthey are. But that is a mere detail. I have taken you fully into myconfidence now, Mr. Hatherley, and I have shown you how I trust you.’He rose as he spoke. ‘I shall expect you, then, at Eyford at 11.15.’



“‘I shall certainly be there.’



“‘And not a word to a soul.’ He looked at me with a last, long,

questioning gaze, and then, pressing my hand in a cold, dank grasp, hehurried from the room.



“Well, when I came to think it all over in cool blood I was very muchastonished, as you may both think, at this sudden commission which hadbeen intrusted to me. On the one hand, of course, I was glad, for thefee was at least tenfold what I should have asked had I set a priceupon my own services, and it was possible that this order might leadto other ones. On the other hand, the face and manner of my patronhad made an unpleasant impression upon me, and I could not think thathis explanation of the fuller’s-earth was sufficient to explain thenecessity for my coming at midnight, and his extreme anxiety lest Ishould tell any one of my errand. However, I threw all fears to thewinds, ate a hearty supper, drove to Paddington, and started off,

having obeyed to the letter the injunction as to holding my tongue.







“‘NOT A WORD TO A SOUL’”













“At Reading I had to change not only my carriage, but my station.

However, I was in time for the last train to Eyford, and I reached thelittle dim-lit station after eleven o’clock. I was the only passengerwho got out there, and there was no one upon the platform save a singlesleepy porter with a lantern. As I passed out through the wicket gate,

however, I found my acquaintance of the morning waiting in the shadowupon the other side. Without a word he grasped my arm and hurried meinto a carriage, the door of which was standing open. He drew up thewindows on either side, tapped on the wood-work, and away we went asfast as the horse could go.”



“One horse?” interjected Holmes.



“Yes, only one.”



“Did you observe the color?”



“Yes, I saw it by the side-lights when I was stepping into thecarriage. It was a chestnut.”



“Tired-looking or fresh?”



“Oh, fresh and glossy.”



“Thank you. I am sorry to have interrupted you. Pray continue your mostinteresting statement.”



“Away we went then, and we drove for at least an hour. Colonel LysanderStark had said that it was only seven miles, but I should think, fromthe rate that we seemed to go, and from the time that we took, thatit must have been nearer twelve. He sat at my side in silence all thetime, and I was aware, more than once when I glanced in his direction,

that he was looking at me with great intensity. The country roads seemto be not very good in that part of the world, for we lurched andjolted terribly. I tried to look out of the windows to see something ofwhere we were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could makeout nothing save the occasional bright

blur of a passing light. Nowand then I hazarded some remark to break the monotony of the journey,

but the colonel answered only in monosyllables, and the conversationsoon flagged. At last, however, the bumping of the road was exchangedfor the crisp smoothness of a gravel-drive, and the carriage came toa stand. Colonel Lysander Stark sprang out, and, as I followed afterhim, pulled me swiftly into a porch which gaped in front of us. Westepped, as it were, right out of the carriage and into the hall, sothat I failed to catch the most fleeting glance of the front of thehouse. The instant that I had crossed the threshold the door slammedheavily behind us, and I heard faintly the rattle of the wheels as thecarriage drove away.



“It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled aboutlooking for matches, and muttering under his breath. Suddenly a dooropened at the other end of the passage, and a long, golden bar of lightshot out in our direction. It grew broader, and a woman appeared witha lamp in her hand, which she held above her head, pushing her faceforward and peering at us. I could see that she was pretty, and fromthe gloss with which the light shone upon her dark dress I knew thatit was a rich material. She spoke a few words in a foreign tongue in atone as though asking a question, and when my companion answered in agruff monosyllable she gave such a start that the lamp nearly fell fromher hand. Colonel Stark went up to her, whispered something in her ear,

and then, pushing her back into the room from whence she had come, hewalked towards me again with the lamp in his hand.



“‘Perhaps you will have the kindness to wait in this room for a fewminutes,’ said he, throwing open another door. It was a quiet, little,

plainly-furnished room, with a round table in the centre, on whichseveral German books were scattered. Colonel Stark laid down the lampon the top of a harmonium beside the door. ‘I shall not keep youwaiting an instant,’ said he, and vanished into the darkness.



“I glanced at the books upon the table, and in spite of my ignoranceof German I could see that two of them were treatises on science, theothers being volumes of poetry. Then I walked across to the window,

hoping that I might catch some glimpse of the country-side, but an oakshutter, heavily barred, was folded across it. It was a wonderfullysilent house. There was an old clock ticking loudly somewhere in thepassage, but otherwise everything was deadly still. A vague feeling ofuneasiness began to steal over me. Who were these German people, andwhat were they doing, living in this strange, out-of-the-way place?

And where was the place? I was ten miles or so from Eyford, that wasall I knew, but whether north, south, east, or west I had no idea.

For that matter, Reading, and possibly other large towns, were withinthat radius, so the place might not be so secluded, after all. Yet itwas quite certain, from the absolute stillness, that we were in thecountry. I paced up and down the room, humming a tune under my breathto keep up my spirits, and feeling that I was thoroughly earning myfifty-guinea fee.



“Suddenly, without any preliminary sound in the midst of the utterstillness, the door of my room swung slowly open. The woman wasstanding in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind her, theyellow light from my lamp beating upon her eager and beautiful face. Icould see at a glance that she was sick with fear, and the sight sent achill to my own heart. She held up one shaking finger to warn me to besilent, and she shot a few whispered words of broken English at me, hereyes glancing back, like those of a frightened horse, into the gloombehind her.



“‘I would go,’ said she, trying hard, as it seemed to me, to speakcalmly; ‘I would go. I should not stay here. There is no good for youto do.’



“‘But, madam,’ said I, ‘I have not yet done what I came for. I cannotpossibly leave until I have seen the machine.’



“‘It is not worth your while to wait,’ she went on. ‘You can passthrough the door; no one hinders.’ And then, seeing that I smiled andshook my head, she suddenly threw aside her constraint and made a stepforward, with her hands wrung together. ‘For the love of Heaven!’ shewhispered, ‘get away from here before it is too late!’



“But I am somewhat headstrong by nature, and the more ready to engagein an affair when there is some obstacle in the way. I thought of myfifty-guinea fee, of my wearisome journey, and of the unpleasant nightwhich seemed to be before me. Was it all to go for nothing? Why shouldI slink away without having carried out my commission, and withoutthe payment which was my due? This woman might, for all I knew, be amonomaniac. With a stout bearing, therefore, though her manner hadshaken me more than I cared to confess, I still shook my head, anddeclared my intention of remaining where I was. She was about to renewher entreaties, when a door slammed overhead, and the sound of severalfootsteps were heard upon the stairs. She listened for an instant,

threw up her hands with a despairing gesture, and vanished as suddenlyand as noiselessly as she had come.



“The new-comers were Colonel Lysander Stark and a short, thick man witha chinchilla beard growing out of the creases of his double chin, whowas introduced to me as Mr. Ferguson.



“‘This is my secretary and manager,’ said the colonel. ‘By-the-way, Iwas under the impression that I left this door shut just now. I fearthat you have felt the draught.’



“‘On the contrary,’ said I, ‘I opened the door myself, because I feltthe room to be a little close.’



“He shot one of his suspicious looks at me. ‘Perhaps we had betterproceed to business, then,’ said he. ‘Mr. Ferguson and I will take youup to see the machine.’



“‘I had better put my hat on, I suppose.’



“‘Oh no, it is in the house.’



“‘What, you dig fuller’s-earth in the house?’



“‘No, no. This is only where we compress it. But never mind that. Allwe wish you to do is to examine the machine, and to let us know what iswrong with it.’



“We went up-stairs together, the colonel first with the lamp, the fatmanager, and I behind him. It was a labyrinth of an old house, withcorridors, passages, narrow winding staircases, and little low doors,

the thresholds of which were hollowed out by the generations who hadcrossed them. There were no carpets and no signs of any furnitureabove the ground floor, while the plaster was peeling off the walls,

and the damp was breaking through in green, unhealthy blotches. I triedto put on as unconcerned an air as possible, but I had not forgottenthe warnings of the lady, even though I disregarded them, and I kept akeen eye upon my two companions. Ferguson appeared to be a morose andsilent man, but I could see from the little that he said that he was atleast a fellow-countryman.



“Colonel Lysander Stark stopped at last before a low door, which heunlocked. Within was a small, square room, in which the three of uscould hardly get at one time. Ferguson remained outside, and thecolonel ushered me in.



“‘We are now,’ said he, ‘actually within the hydraulic press, and itwould be a particularly unpleasant thing for us if any one were toturn it on. The ceiling of this small chamber is really the end of thedescending piston, and it comes down with the force of many tons uponthis metal floor. There are small lateral columns of water outsidewhich receive the force, and which transmit and multiply it in themanner which is familiar to you. The machine goes readily enough, butthere is some stiffness in the working of it, and it has lost a littleof its force. Perhaps you will have the goodness to look it over and toshow us how we can set it right.’



“I took the lamp from him, and I examined the machine very thoroughly.

It was indeed a gigantic one, and capable of exercising enormouspressure. When I passed outside, however, and pressed down the leverswhich controlled it, I knew at once by the whishing sound that therewas a slight leakage, which allowed a regurgitation of water throughone of the side cylinders. An examination showed that one of theindia-rubber bands which was round the head of a driving-rod had shrunkso as not quite to fill the socket along which it worked. This wasclearly the cause of the loss of power, and I pointed it out to mycompanions, who followed my remarks very carefully, and asked severalpractical questions as to how they should proceed to set it right. WhenI had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of themachine and took a good look at it to satisfy my own curiosity. It wasobvious at a glance that the story of the fuller’s-earth was the merestfabrication, for it would be absurd to suppose that so powerful anengine could be designed for so inadequate a purpose. The walls were ofwood, but the floor consisted of a large iron trough, and when I cameto examine it I could see a crust of metallic deposit all over it. Ihad stooped and was scraping at this to see exactly what it was, when Iheard a muttered exclamation in German, and saw the cadaverous face ofthe colonel looking down at me.



“‘What are you doing there?’ he asked.



“I felt angry at having been tricked by so elaborate a story as thatwhich he had told me. ‘I was admiring your fuller’s-earth,’ said I; ‘Ithink that I should be better able to advise you as to your machine ifI knew what the exact purpose was for which it was used.’



“The instant that I uttered the words I regretted the rashness of myspeech. His face set hard, and a baleful light sprang up in his grayeyes.



“‘Very well,’ said he, ‘you shall know all about the machine.’ He tooka step backward, slammed the little door, and turned the key in thelock. I rushed towards it and pulled at the handle, but it was quitesecure, and did not give in the least to my kicks and shoves. ‘Hello!’I yelled. ‘Hello! Colonel! Let me out!’



“And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my heartinto my mouth. It was the clank of the levers and the swish of theleaking cylinder. He had set the engine at work. The lamp still stoodupon the floor where I had placed it when examining the trough. By itslight I saw that the black ceiling was coming down upon me, slowly,

jerkily, but, as none knew better than myself, with a force whichmust within a minute grind me to a shapeless pulp. I threw myself,

screaming, against the door, and dragged with my nails at the lock. Iimplored the colonel to let me out, but the remorseless clanking of thelevers drowned my cries. The ceiling was only a foot or two above myhead, and with my hand upraised I could feel its hard, rough surface.

Then it flashed through my mind that the pain of my death would dependvery much upon the position in which I met it. If I lay on my facethe weight would come upon my spine, and I shuddered to think of thatdreadful snap. Easier the other way, perhaps; and yet, had I the nerveto lie and look up at that deadly black shadow wavering down upon me?

Already I was unable to stand erect, when my eye caught something whichbrought a gush of hope back to my heart.



“I have said that though the floor and ceiling were of iron, the wallswere of wood. As I gave a last hurried glance around, I saw a thinline of yellow light between two of the boards, which broadened andbroadened as a small panel was pushed backward. For an instant I couldhardly believe that here was indeed a door which led away from death.

The next instant I threw myself through, and lay half-fainting upon theother side. The panel had closed again behind me, but the crash of thelamp, and a few moments afterwards the clang of the two slabs of metal,

told me how narrow had been my escape.



“I was recalled to myself by a frantic plucking at my wrist, and Ifound myself lying upon the stone floor of a narrow corridor, while awoman bent over me and tugged at me with her left hand, while she helda candle in her right. It was the same good friend whose warning I hadso foolishly rejected.



“‘Come! come!’ she cried, breathlessly. ‘They will be here in a moment.

They will see that you are not there. Oh, do not waste the so-precioustime, but come!’



“This time, at least, I did not scorn her advice. I staggered to myfeet and ran with her along the corridor and down a winding stair. Thelatter led to another broad passage, and, just as we reached it, weheard the sound of running feet and the shouting of two voices, oneanswering the other, from the floor on which we were and from the onebeneath. My guide stopped and looked about her like one who is at herwits’ end. Then she threw open a door which led into a bedroom, throughthe window of which the moon was shining brightly.



“‘It is your only chance,’ said she. ‘It is high, but it may be thatyou can jump it.’



“As she spoke a light sprang into view at the further end of thepassage, and I saw the lean figure of Colonel Lysander Stark rushingforward with a lantern in one hand and a weapon like a butcher’scleaver in the other. I rushed across the bedroom, flung open thewindow, and looked out. How quiet and sweet and wholesome the gardenlooked in the moonlight, and it could not be more than thirty feetdown. I clambered out upon the sill, but I hesitated to jump until Ishould have heard what passed between my savior and the ruffian whopursued me. If she were ill-used, then at any risks I was determined togo back to her assistance. The thought had hardly flashed through mymind before he was at the door, pushing his way past her; but she threwher arms round him and tried to hold him back.



“‘Fritz! Fritz!’ she cried, in English, ‘remember your promise afterthe last time. You said it should not be again. He will be silent! Oh,

he will be silent!’



“‘You are mad, Elise!’ he shouted, struggling to break away from her.

‘You will be the ruin of us. He has seen too much. Let me pass, I say!’He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the window, cut at me withhis heavy weapon. I had let myself go, and was hanging by the hands tothe sill, when his blow fell. I was conscious of a dull pain, my griploosened, and I fell into the garden below.



“I was shaken but not hurt by the fall; so I picked myself up andrushed off among the bushes as hard as I could run, for I understoodthat I was far from being out of danger yet. Suddenly, however, as Iran, a deadly dizziness and sickness came over me. I glanced down atmy hand, which was throbbing painfully, and then, for the first time,

saw that my thumb had been cut off and that the blood was pouring frommy wound. I endeavored to tie my handkerchief round it, but there camea sudden buzzing in my ears, and next moment I fell in a dead faintamong the rose-bushes.



“How long I remained unconscious I cannot tell. It must have beena very long time, for the moon had sunk, and a bright morning wasbreaking when I came to myself. My clothes were all sodden with dew,

and my coat-sleeve was drenched with blood from my wounded thumb.

The smarting of it recalled in an instant all the particulars of mynight’s adventure, and I sprang to my feet with the feeling that Imight hardly yet be safe from my pursuers. But, to my astonishment,

when I came to look round me, neither house nor garden were to be seen.

I had been lying in an angle of the hedge close by the high-road, andjust a little lower down was a long building, which proved, upon myapproaching it, to be the very station at which I had arrived upon theprevious night. Were it not for the ugly wound upon my hand, all thathad passed during those dreadful hours might have been an evil dream.



“Half dazed, I went into the station and asked about the morning train.

There would be one to Reading in less than an hour. The same porterwas on duty, I found, as had been there when I arrived. I inquired ofhim whether he had ever heard of Colonel Lysander Stark. The name wasstrange to him. Had he observed a carriage the night before waiting forme? No, he had not. Was there a police-station anywhere near? There wasone about three miles off.



“It was too far for me to go, weak and ill as I was. I determined towait until I got back to town before telling my story to the police. Itwas a little past six when I arrived, so I went first to have my wounddressed, and then the doctor was kind enough to bring me along here. Iput the case into your hands, and shall do exactly what you advise.”





We both sat in silence for some little time after, listening to thisextraordinary narrative. Then Sherlock Holmes pulled down from theshelf one of the ponderous commonplace books in which he placed hiscuttings.



“Here is an advertisement which will interest you,” said he. “Itappeared in all the papers about a year ago. Listen to this: ‘Lost,

on the 9th inst., Mr. Jeremiah Hayling, aged twenty-six, an hydraulicengineer. Left his lodgings at ten o’clock at night, and has not beenheard of since. Was dressed in,’ etc., etc. Ha! That represents thelast time that the colonel needed to have his machine overhauled, Ifancy.”



“Good heavens!” cried my patient. “Then that explains what the girlsaid.”



“Undoubtedly. It is quite clear that the colonel was a cool anddesperate man, who was absolutely determined that nothing should standin the way of his little game, like those out-and-out pirates who willleave no survivor from a captured ship. Well, every moment now isprecious, so if you feel equal to it, we shall go down to Scotland Yardat once as a preliminary to starting for Eyford.”



Some three hours or so afterwards we were all in the train together,

bound from Reading to the little Berkshire village. There were SherlockHolmes, the hydraulic engineer, Inspector Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard,

a plain-clothes man, and myself. Bradstreet had spread an ordnancemap of the county out upon the seat, and was busy with his compassesdrawing a circle with Eyford for its centre.



“There you are,” said he. “That circle is drawn at a radius of tenmiles from the village. The place we want must be somewhere near thatline. You said ten miles, I think, sir.”



“It was an hour’s good drive.”



“And you think that they brought you back all that way when you wereunconscious?”



“They must have done so. I have a confused memory, too, of having beenlifted and conveyed somewhere.”





“What I cannot understand,” said I, “is why they should have spared youwhen they found you lying fainting in the garden. Perhaps the villainwas softened by the woman’s entreaties.”



“I hardly think that likely. I never saw a more inexorable face in mylife.”



“Oh, we shall soon clear up all that,” said Bradstreet. “Well, I havedrawn my circle, and I only wish I knew at what point upon it the folkthat we are in search of are to be found.”



“I think I could lay my finger on it,” said Holmes, quietly.



“Really, now!” cried the inspector, “you have formed your opinion!

Come, now, we shall see who agrees with you. I say it is south, for thecountry is more deserted there.”



“And I say east,” said my patient.



“I am for west,” remarked the plain-clothes man. “There are severalquiet little villages up there.”



“And I am for north,” said I, “because there are no hills there, andour friend says that he did not notice the carriage go up any.”



“Come,” cried the inspector, laughing; “it’s a very pretty diversityof opinion. We have boxed the compass among us. Who do you give yourcasting vote to?”



“You are all wrong.”



“But we can’t all be.”



“Oh yes, you can. This is my point;” he placed his finger in the centreof the circle. “This is where we shall find them.”



“But the twelve-mile drive?” gasped Hatherley.



“Six out and six back. Nothing simpler. You say yourself that the horsewas fresh and glossy when you got in. How could it be that if it hadgone twelve miles over heavy roads?”



“Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough,” observed Bradstreet,

thoughtfully. “Of course there can be no doubt as to the nature of thisgang.”





“None at all,” said Holmes. “They are coiners on a large scale, andhave used the machine to form the amalgam which has taken the place ofsilver.”



“We have known for some time that a clever gang was at work,” said theinspector. “They have been turning out half-crowns by the thousand. Weeven traced them as far as Reading, but could get no farther, for theyhad covered their traces in a way that showed that they were very oldhands. But now, thanks to this lucky chance, I think that we have gotthem right enough.”



But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not destinedto fall into the hands of justice. As we rolled into Eyford Station wesaw a gigantic column of smoke which streamed up from behind a smallclump of trees in the neighborhood, and hung like an immense ostrichfeather over the landscape.



“A house on fire?” asked Bradstreet, as the train steamed off again onits way.



“Yes, sir!” said the station-master.



“When did it break out?”



“I hear that it was during the night, sir, but it has got worse, andthe whole place is in a blaze.”



“Whose house is it?”



“Dr. Becher’s.”



“Tell me,” broke in the engineer, “is Dr. Becher a German, very thin,

with a long, sharp nose?”



The station-master laughed heartily. “No, sir, Dr. Becher is anEnglishman, and there isn’t a man in the parish who has a better-linedwaistcoat. But he has a gentleman staying with him, a patient, asI understand, who is a foreigner, and he looks as if a little goodBerkshire beef would do him no harm.”



The station-master had not finished his speech before we were allhastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low hill,

and there was a great wide-spread whitewashed building in front of us,

spouting fire at every chink and window, while in the garden in frontthree fire-engines were vainly striving to keep the flames under.



“That’s it!” cried Hatherley, in intense excitement. “There is thegravel-drive, and there are the rose-bushes where I lay. That secondwindow is the one that I jumped from.”



“Well, at least,” said Holmes, “you have had your revenge upon them.

There can be no question that it was your oil-lamp which, when it wascrushed in the press, set fire to the wooden walls, though no doubtthey were too excited in the chase after you to observe it at the time.

Now keep your eyes open in this crowd for your friends of last night,

though I very much fear that they are a good hundred miles off by now.”



And Holmes’s fears came to be realized, for from that day to this noword has ever been heard either of the beautiful woman, the sinisterGerman, or the morose Englishman. Early that morning a peasant had meta cart containing several people and some very bulky boxes drivingrapidly in the direction of Reading, but there all traces of thefugitives disappeared, and even Holmes’s ingenuity failed ever todiscover the least clew as to their whereabouts.



The firemen had been much perturbed at the strange arrangements whichthey had found within, and still more so by discovering a newly severedhuman thumb upon a window-sill of the second floor. About sunset,

however, their efforts were at last successful, and they subdued theflames, but not before the roof had fallen in, and the whole place beenreduced to such absolute ruin that, save some twisted cylinders andiron piping, not a trace remained of the machinery which had cost ourunfortunate acquaintance so dearly. Large masses of nickel and of tinwere discovered stored in an out-house, but no coins were to be found,

which may have explained the presence of those bulky boxes which havebeen already referred to.



How our hydraulic engineer had been conveyed from the garden to thespot where he recovered his senses might have remained forever amystery were it not for the soft mould, which told us a very plaintale. He had evidently been carried down by two persons, one of whomhad remarkably small feet and the other unusually large ones. On thewhole, it was most probable that the silent Englishman, being less boldor less murderous than his companion, had assisted the woman to bearthe unconscious man out of the way of danger.



“Well,” said our engineer ruefully, as we took our seats to return oncemore to London, “it has been a pretty business for me! I have lost mythumb and I have lost a fifty-guinea fee, and what have I gained?”



“Experience,” said Holmes, laughing. “Indirectly it may be of value,

you know; you have only to put it into words to gain the reputation ofbeing excellent company for the remainder of your existence.”







Adventure XTHE ADVENTURE OF THE NOBLE BACHELOR
















THE Lord St. Simon marriage, and its curious termination, have longceased to be a subject of interest in those exalted circles in whichthe unfortunate bridegroom moves. Fresh scandals have eclipsed it,

and their more piquant details have drawn the gossips away from thisfour-year-old drama. As I have reason to believe, however, that thefull facts have never been revealed to the general public, and as myfriend Sherlock Holmes had a considerable share in clearing the matterup, I feel that no memoir of him would be complete without some littlesketch of this remarkable episode.



It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I wasstill sharing rooms with Holmes in Baker Street, that he came home froman afternoon stroll to find a letter on the table waiting for him.

I had remained in-doors all day, for the weather had taken a suddenturn to rain, with high autumnal winds, and the jezail bullet which Ihad brought back in one of my limbs as a relic of my Afghan campaign,

throbbed with dull persistency. With my body in one easy-chair and mylegs upon another, I had surrounded myself with a cloud of newspapers,

until at last, saturated with the news of the day, I tossed them allaside and lay listless, watching the huge crest and monogram upon theenvelope upon the table, and wondering lazily who my friend’s noblecorrespondent could be.



“Here is a very fashionable epistle,” I remarked, as he entered. “Yourmorning letters, if I remember right, were from a fish-monger and atide-waiter.”





“Yes, my correspondence has certainly the charm of variety,” heanswered, smiling, “and the humbler are usually the more interesting.

This looks like one of those unwelcome social summonses which call upona man either to be bored or to lie.”



He broke the seal and glanced over the contents.



“Oh, come, it may prove to be something of interest after all.”



“Not social, then?”



“No, distinctly professional.”



“And from a noble client?”



“One of the highest in England.”



“My dear fellow, I congratulate you.”



“I assure you, Watson, without affectation, that the status of myclient is a matter of less moment to me than the interest of his case.

It is just possible, however, that that also may not be wanting in thisnew investigation. You have been reading the papers diligently of late,

have you not?”



“It looks like it,” said I, ruefully, pointing to a huge bundle in thecorner. “I have had nothing else to do.”



“It is fortunate, for you will perhaps be able to post me up. I readnothing except the criminal news and the agony column. The latter isalways instructive. But if you have followed recent events so closelyyou must have read about Lord St. Simon and his wedding?”



“Oh yes, with the deepest interest.”



“That is well. The letter which I hold in my hand is from Lord St.

Simon. I will read it to you, and in return you must turn over thesepapers and let me have whatever bears upon the matter. This is what hesays:



“‘My dear Mr. Sherlock Holmes,—Lord Backwater tells me that Imay place implicit reliance upon your judgment and discretion.

I have determined, therefore, to call upon you, and to consultyou in reference to the very painful event which has occurredin connection with my wedding. Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard,

is acting already in the matter, but he assures me that he seesno objection to your co-operation, and that he even thinks thatit might be of some assistance. I will call at four o’clock inthe afternoon, and, should you have any other engagement atthat time, I hope that you will postpone it, as this matter isof paramount importance.



Yours faithfully, St. Simon.’











“It is dated from Grosvenor Mansions, written with a quill pen, and thenoble lord has had the misfortune to get a smear of ink upon the outerside of his right little finger,” remarked Holmes, as he folded up theepistle.



“He says four o’clock. It is three now. He will be here in an hour.”



“Then I have just time, with your assistance, to get clear upon thesubject. Turn over those papers, and arrange the extracts in theirorder of time, while I take a glance as to who our client is.” Hepicked a red-covered volume from a line of books of reference besidethe mantel-piece. “Here he is,” said he, sitting down and flattening itout upon his knee. “Lord Robert Walsingham de Vere St. Simon, secondson of the Duke of Balmoral—Hum! Arms: Azure, three caltrops in chiefover a fess sable. Born in 1846. He’s forty-one years of age, whichis mature for marriage. Was Undersecretary for the Colonies in a lateAdministration. The Duke, his father, was at one time Secretary forForeign Affairs. They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, andTudor on the distaff side. Ha! Well, there is nothing very instructivein all this. I think that I must turn to you, Watson, for somethingmore solid.”



“I have very little difficulty in finding what I want,” said I, “forthe facts are quite recent, and the matter struck me as remarkable. Ifeared to refer them to you, however, as I knew that you had an inquiryon hand, and that you disliked the intrusion of other matters.”



“Oh, you mean the little problem of the Grosvenor Square furniturevan. That is quite cleared up now—though, indeed, it was obvious fromthe first. Pray give me the results of your newspaper selections.”



“Here is the first notice which I can find. It is in the personalcolumn of The Morning Post, and dates, as you see, some weeks back.

‘A marriage has been arranged,’ it says, ‘and will, if rumor iscorrect, very shortly take place, between Lord Robert St. Simon, secondson of the Duke of Balmoral, and Miss Hatty Doran, the only daughter ofAloysius Doran, Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.’ That is all.”



“Terse and to the point,” remarked Holmes, stretching his long, thinlegs towards the fire.



“There was a paragraph amplifying this in one of the society papersof the same week. Ah, here it is. ‘There will soon be a call forprotection in the marriage market, for the present free-trade principleappears to tell heavily against our home product. One by one themanagement of the noble houses of Great Britain is passing into thehands of our fair cousins from across the Atlantic. An importantaddition has been made during the last week to the list of the prizeswhich have been borne away by these charming invaders. Lord St. Simon,

who has shown himself for over twenty years proof against the littlegod’s arrows, has now definitely announced his approaching marriagewith Miss Hatty Doran, the fascinating daughter of a Californiamillionaire. Miss Doran, whose graceful figure and striking faceattracted much attention at the Westbury House festivities, is anonly child, and it is currently reported that her dowry will run toconsiderably over the six figures, with expectancies for the future.

As it is an open secret that the Duke of Balmoral has been compelledto sell his pictures within the last few years, and as Lord St. Simonhas no property of his own, save the small estate of Birchmoor, itis obvious that the Californian heiress is not the only gainer by analliance which will enable her to make the easy and common transitionfrom a Republican lady to a British peeress.’”





“Anything else?” asked Holmes, yawning.



“Oh yes; plenty. Then there is another note in The Morning Post tosay that the marriage would be an absolutely quiet one, that it wouldbe at St. George’s, Hanover Square, that only half a dozen intimatefriends would be invited, and that the party would return to thefurnished house at Lancaster Gate which has been taken by Mr. AloysiusDoran. Two days later—that is, on Wednesday last—there is a curtannouncement that the wedding had taken place, and that the honey-moonwould be passed at Lord Backwater’s place, near Petersfield. Those areall the notices which appeared before the disappearance of the bride.”



“Before the what?” asked Holmes, with a start.



“The vanishing of the lady.”



“When did she vanish, then?”



“At the wedding breakfast.”



“Indeed. This is more interesting than it promised to be; quitedramatic, in fact.”



“Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common.”



“They often vanish before the ceremony, and occasionally during thehoney-moon; but I cannot call to mind anything quite so prompt as this.

Pray let me have the details.”



“I warn you that they are very incomplete.”



“Perhaps we may make them less so.”



“Such as they are, they are set forth in a single article of a morningpaper of yesterday, which I will read to you. It is headed, ‘SingularOccurrence at a Fashionable Wedding’:



“‘The family of Lord Robert St. Simon has been thrown into thegreatest consternation by the strange and painful episodes which havetaken place in connection with his wedding. The ceremony, as shortlyannounced in the papers of yesterday, occurred on the previous morning;but it is only now that it has been possible to confirm the strangerumors which have been so persistently floating about. In spite ofthe attempts of the friends to hush the matter up, so much publicattention has now been drawn to it that no good purpose can be servedby affecting to disregard what is a common subject for conversation.



“‘The ceremony, which was performed at St. George’s, Hanover Square,

was a very quiet one, no one being present save the father of thebride, Mr. Aloysius Doran, the Duchess of Balmoral, Lord Backwater,

Lord Eustace, and Lady Clara St. Simon (the younger brother and sisterof the bridegroom), and Lady Alicia Whittington. The whole partyproceeded afterwards to the house of Mr. Aloysius Doran, at LancasterGate, where breakfast had been prepared. It appears that some littletrouble was caused by a woman, whose name has not been ascertained,

who endeavored to force her way into the house after the bridal party,

alleging that she had some claim upon Lord St. Simon. It was only aftera painful and prolonged scene that she was ejected by the butler andthe footman. The bride, who had fortunately entered the house beforethis unpleasant interruption, had sat down to breakfast with the rest,

when she complained of a sudden indisposition, and retired to her room.

Her prolonged absence having caused some comment, her father followedher, but learned from her maid that she had only come up to her chamberfor an instant, caught up an ulster and bonnet, and hurried down tothe passage. One of the footmen declared that he had seen a lady leavethe house thus apparelled, but had refused to credit that it was hismistress, believing her to be with the company. On ascertaining thathis daughter had disappeared, Mr. Aloysius Doran, in conjunction withthe bridegroom, instantly put themselves into communication withthe police, and very energetic inquiries are being made, which willprobably result in a speedy clearing up of this very singular business.

Up to a late hour last night, however, nothing had transpired as tothe whereabouts of the missing lady. There are rumors of foul play inthe matter, and it is said that the police have caused the arrest ofthe woman who had caused the original disturbance, in the belief that,

from jealousy or some other motive, she may have been concerned in thestrange disappearance of the bride.’”



“And is that all?”



“Only one little item in another of the morning papers, but it is asuggestive one.”



“And it is—”



“That Miss Flora Millar, the lady who had caused the disturbance, hasactually been arrested. It appears that she was formerly a danseuseat the ‘Allegro,’ and that she has known the bridegroom for some years.

There are no further particulars, and the whole case is in your handsnow—so far as it has been set forth in the public press.”



“And an exceedingly interesting case it appears to be. I would not havemissed it for worlds. But there is a ring at the bell, Watson, and asthe clock makes it a few minutes after four, I have no doubt that thiswill prove to be our noble client. Do not dream of going, Watson, for Ivery much prefer having a witness, if only as a check to my own memory.”



“Lord Robert St. Simon,” announced our page-boy, throwing open thedoor. A gentleman entered, with a pleasant, cultured face, high-nosedand pale, with something perhaps of petulance about the mouth, andwith the steady, well-opened eye of a man whose pleasant lot it hadever been to command and to be obeyed. His manner was brisk, and yethis general appearance gave an undue impression of age, for he had aslight forward stoop and a little bend of the knees as he walked. Hishair, too, as he swept off his very curly-brimmed hat, was grizzledround the edges and thin upon the top. As to his dress, it was carefulto the verge of foppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, whitewaistcoat, yellow gloves, patent-leather shoes, and light-coloredgaiters. He advanced slowly into the room, turning his head from leftto right, and swinging in his right hand the cord which held his goldeneye-glasses.



“Good-day, Lord St. Simon,” said Holmes, rising and bowing. “Pray takethe basket-chair. This is my friend and colleague, Dr. Watson. Draw upa little to the fire, and we will talk this matter over.”



“A most painful matter to me, as you can most readily imagine, Mr.

Holmes. I have been cut to the quick. I understand that you havealready managed several delicate cases of this sort, sir, though Ipresume that they were hardly from the same class of society.”



“No, I am descending.”



“I beg pardon.”



“My last client of the sort was a king.”



“Oh, really! I had no idea. And which king?”



“The King of Scandinavia.”



“What! Had he lost his wife?”



“You can understand,” said Holmes, suavely, “that I extend to theaffairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to you inyours.”



“Of course! Very right! very right! I’m sure I beg pardon. As to my owncase, I am ready to give you any information which may assist you informing an opinion.”



“Thank you. I have already learned all that is in the public prints,

nothing more. I presume that I may take it as correct—this article,

for example, as to the disappearance of the bride.”



Lord St. Simon glanced over it. “Yes, it is correct, as far as it goes.”



“But it needs a great deal of supplementing before any one could offeran opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most directly byquestioning you.”



“Pray do so.”



“When did you first meet Miss Hatty Doran?”



“In San Francisco, a year ago.”



“You were travelling in the States?”



“Yes.”



“Did you become engaged then?”



“No.”



“But you were on a friendly footing?”





“I was amused by her society, and she could see that I was amused.”



“Her father is very rich?”



“He is said to be the richest man on the Pacific slope.”



“And how did he make his money?”



“In mining. He had nothing a few years ago. Then he struck gold,

invested it, and came up by leaps and bounds.”



“Now, what is your own impression as to the young lady’s—your wife’scharacter?”



The nobleman swung his glasses a little faster and stared down into thefire. “You see, Mr. Holmes,” said he, “my wife was twenty before herfather became a rich man. During that time she ran free in a miningcamp, and wandered through woods or mountains, so that her educationhas come from Nature rather than from the school-master. She is whatwe call in England a tomboy, with a strong nature, wild and free,

unfettered by any sort of traditions. She is impetuous—volcanic, Iwas about to say. She is swift in making up her mind, and fearlessin carrying out her resolutions. On the other hand, I would not havegiven her the name which I have the honor to bear”—he gave a littlestately cough—“had not I thought her to be at bottom a noble woman. Ibelieve that she is capable of heroic self-sacrifice, and that anythingdishonorable would be repugnant to her.”



“Have you her photograph?”



“I brought this with me.” He opened a locket, and showed us the fullface of a very lovely woman. It was not a photograph, but an ivoryminiature, and the artist had brought out the full effect of thelustrous black hair, the large dark eyes, and the exquisite mouth.

Holmes gazed long and earnestly at it. Then he closed the locket andhanded it back to Lord St. Simon.



“The young lady came to London, then, and you renewed youracquaintance?”



“Yes, her father brought her over for this last London season. I mether several times, became engaged to her, and have now married her.”



“She brought, I understand, a considerable dowry?”



“A fair dowry. Not more than is usual in my family.”



“And this, of course, remains to you, since the marriage is a faitaccompli?”



“I really have made no inquiries on the subject.”



“Very naturally not. Did you see Miss Doran on the day before thewedding?”



“Yes.”



“Was she in good spirits?”



“Never better. She kept talking of what we should do in our futurelives.”



“Indeed! That is very interesting. And on the morning of the wedding?”



“She was as bright as possible—at least, until after the ceremony.”



“And did you observe any change in her then?”



“Well, to tell the truth, I saw then the first signs that I had everseen that her temper was just a little sharp. The incident, however,

was too trivial to relate, and can have no possible bearing upon thecase.”



“Pray let us have it, for all that.”



“Oh, it is childish. She dropped her bouquet as we went towards thevestry. She was passing the front pew at the time, and it fell overinto the pew. There was a moment’s delay, but the gentleman in thepew handed it up to her again, and it did not appear to be the worsefor the fall. Yet, when I spoke to her of the matter, she answered meabruptly; and in the carriage, on our way home, she seemed absurdlyagitated over this trifling cause.”



“Indeed! You say that there was a gentleman in the pew. Some of thegeneral public were present, then?”



“Oh yes. It is impossible to exclude them when the church is open.”



“This gentleman was not one of your wife’s friends?”





“No, no; I call him a gentleman by courtesy, but he was quite acommon-looking person. I hardly noticed his appearance. But really Ithink that we are wandering rather far from the point.”



“Lady St. Simon, then, returned from the wedding in a less cheerfulframe of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do on re-enteringher father’s house?”



“I saw her in conversation with her maid.”



“And who is her maid?”



“Alice is her name. She is an American, and came from California withher.”



“A confidential servant?”



“A little too much so. It seemed to me that her mistress allowed her totake great liberties. Still, of course, in America they look upon thesethings in a different way.”



“How long did she speak to this Alice?”



“Oh, a few minutes. I had something else to think of.”



“You did not overhear what they said?”



“Lady St. Simon said something about ‘jumping a claim.’ She wasaccustomed to use slang of the kind. I have no idea what she meant.”



“American slang is very expressive sometimes. And what did your wife dowhen she finished speaking to her maid?”



“She walked into the breakfast-room.”



“On your arm?”



“No, alone. She was very independent in little matters like that.

Then, after we had sat down for ten minutes or so, she rose hurriedly,

muttered some words of apology, and left the room. She never came back.”



“But this maid, Alice, as I understand, deposes that she went to herroom, covered her bride’s dress with a long ulster, put on a bonnet,

and went out.”



“Quite so. And she was afterwards seen walking into Hyde Park incompany with Flora Millar, a woman who is now in custody, and who hadalready made a disturbance at Mr. Doran’s house that morning.”





“Ah, yes. I should like a few particulars as to this young lady, andyour relations to her.”



Lord St. Simon shrugged his shoulders and raised his eyebrows. “Wehave been on a friendly footing for some years—I may say on a veryfriendly footing. She used to be at the ‘Allegro.’ I have not treatedher ungenerously, and she has no just cause of complaint against me;but you know what women are, Mr. Holmes. Flora was a dear little thing,

but exceedingly hot-headed, and devotedly attached to me. She wrote medreadful letters when she heard that I was about to be married; and, totell the truth, the reason why I had the marriage celebrated so quietlywas that I feared lest there might be a scandal in the church. She cameto Mr. Doran’s door just after we returned, and she endeavored to pushher way in, uttering very abusive expressions towards my wife, and eventhreatening her, but I had foreseen the possibility of something of thesort, and I had two police fellows there in private clothes, who soonpushed her out again. She was quiet when she saw that there was no goodin making a row.”



“Did your wife hear all this?”



“No, thank goodness, she did not.”



“And she was seen walking with this very woman afterwards?”



“Yes. That is what Mr. Lestrade, of Scotland Yard, looks upon as soserious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out, and laid someterrible trap for her.”



“Well, it is a possible supposition.”



“You think so, too?”



“I did not say a probable one. But you do not yourself look upon thisas likely?”



“I do not think Flora would hurt a fly.”



“Still, jealousy is a strange transformer of characters. Pray what isyour own theory as to what took place?”



“Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I havegiven you all the facts. Since you ask me, however, I may say that ithas occurred to me as possible that the excitement of this affair, theconsciousness that she had made so immense a social stride, had theeffect of causing some little nervous disturbance in my wife.”



“In short, that she had become suddenly deranged?”



“Well, really, when I consider that she has turned her back—I willnot say upon me, but upon so much that many have aspired to withoutsuccess—I can hardly explain it in any other fashion.”



“Well, certainly that is also a conceivable hypothesis,” said Holmes,

smiling. “And now, Lord St. Simon, I think that I have nearly all mydata. May I ask whether you were seated at the breakfast-table so thatyou could see out of the window?”



“We could see the other side of the road and the Park.”



“Quite so. Then I do not think that I need to detain you longer. Ishall communicate with you.”



“Should you be fortunate enough to solve this problem,” said ourclient, rising.



“I have solved it.”



“Eh? What was that?”



“I say that I have solved it.”



“Where, then, is my wife?”



“That is a detail which I shall speedily supply.”



Lord St. Simon shook his head. “I am afraid that it will take wiserheads than yours or mine,” he remarked, and bowing in a stately,

old-fashioned manner, he departed.



“It is very good of Lord St. Simon to honor my head by putting iton a level with his own,” said Sherlock Holmes, laughing. “I thinkthat I shall have a whiskey-and-soda and a cigar after all thiscross-questioning. I had formed my conclusions as to the case beforeour client came into the room.”



“My dear Holmes!”



“I have notes of several similar cases, though none, as I remarkedbefore, which were quite as prompt. My whole examination served toturn my conjecture into a certainty. Circumstantial evidence isoccasionally very convincing, as when you find a trout in the milk, toquote Thoreau’s example.”



“But I have heard all that you have heard.”



“Without, however, the knowledge of pre-existing cases which serves meso well. There was a parallel instance in Aberdeen some years back,

and something on very much the same lines at Munich the year after theFranco-Prussian war. It is one of these cases—but, hello, here isLestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade! You will find an extra tumbler uponthe sideboard, and there are cigars in the box.”



The official detective was attired in a pea-jacket and cravat, whichgave him a decidedly nautical appearance, and he carried a black canvasbag in his hand. With a short greeting he seated himself and lit thecigar which had been offered to him.



“What’s up, then?” asked Holmes, with a twinkle in his eye. “You lookdissatisfied.”



“And I feel dissatisfied. It is this infernal St. Simon marriage case.

I can make neither head nor tail of the business.”



“Really! You surprise me.”



“Who ever heard of such a mixed affair? Every clew seems to slipthrough my fingers. I have been at work upon it all day.”



“And very wet it seems to have made you,” said Holmes, laying his handupon the arm of the pea-jacket.



“Yes, I have been dragging the Serpentine.”



“In Heaven’s name, what for?”



“In search of the body of Lady St. Simon.”



Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his chair and laughed heartily.



“Have you dragged the basin of Trafalgar Square fountain?” he asked.



“Why? What do you mean?”



“Because you have just as good a chance of finding this lady in the oneas in the other.”





Lestrade shot an angry glance at my companion. “I suppose you know allabout it,” he snarled.



“Well, I have only just heard the facts, but my mind is made up.”



“Oh, indeed! Then you think that the Serpentine plays no part in thematter?”



“I think it very unlikely.”



“Then perhaps you will kindly explain how it is that we found thisin it?” He opened his bag as he spoke, and tumbled onto the floor awedding-dress of watered silk, a pair of white satin shoes, and abride’s wreath and veil, all discolored and soaked in water. “There,”said he, putting a new wedding-ring upon the top of the pile. “There isa little nut for you to crack, Master Holmes.”



“Oh, indeed!” said my friend, blowing blue rings into the air. “Youdragged them from the Serpentine?”



“No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper. Theyhave been identified as her clothes, and it seemed to me that if theclothes were there the body would not be far off.”



“By the same brilliant reasoning, every man’s body is to be found inthe neighborhood of his wardrobe. And pray what did you hope to arriveat through this?”



“At some evidence implicating Flora Millar in the disappearance.”



“I am afraid that you will find it difficult.”



“Are you, indeed, now?” cried Lestrade, with some bitterness. “I amafraid, Holmes, that you are not very practical with your deductionsand your inferences. You have made two blunders in as many minutes.

This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar.”



“And how?”



“In the dress is a pocket. In the pocket is a card-case. In thecard-case is a note. And here is the very note.” He slapped it downupon the table in front of him. “Listen to this: ‘You will see me whenall is ready. Come at once. F. H. M.’ Now my theory all along has beenthat Lady St. Simon was decoyed away by Flora Millar, and that she,

with confederates, no doubt, was responsible for her disappearance.

Here, signed with her initials, is the very note which was no doubtquietly slipped into her hand at the door, and which lured her withintheir reach.”



“Very good, Lestrade,” said Holmes, laughing. “You really are very fineindeed. Let me see it.” He took up the paper in a listless way, buthis attention instantly became riveted, and he gave a little cry ofsatisfaction. “This is indeed important,” said he.



“Ha! you find it so?”



“Extremely so. I congratulate you warmly.”



Lestrade rose in his triumph and bent his head to look. “Why,” heshrieked, “you’re looking at the wrong side!”



“On the contrary, this is the right side.”



“The right side? You’re mad! Here is the note written in pencil overhere.”



“And over here is what appears to be the fragment of a hotel bill,

which interests me deeply.”



“There’s nothing in it. I looked at it before,” said Lestrade. “‘Oct.

4th, rooms 8s., breakfast 2s. 6d., cocktail 1s., lunch 2s.

6d., glass sherry, 8d.’ I see nothing in that.”



“Very likely not. It is most important, all the same. As to the note,

it is important also, or at least the initials are, so I congratulateyou again.”



“I’ve wasted time enough,” said Lestrade, rising. “I believe in hardwork, and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories. Good-day,

Mr. Holmes, and we shall see which gets to the bottom of the matterfirst.” He gathered up the garments, thrust them into the bag, and madefor the door.



“Just one hint to you, Lestrade,” drawled Holmes, before his rivalvanished; “I will tell you the true solution of the matter. Lady St.

Simon is a myth. There is not, and there never has been, any suchperson.”



Lestrade looked sadly at my companion. Then he turned to me, tappedhis forehead three times, shook his head solemnly, and hurried away.



He had hardly shut the door behind him when Holmes rose and put on hisovercoat. “There is something in what the fellow says about out-doorwork,” he remarked, “so I think, Watson, that I must leave you to yourpapers for a little.”



It was after five o’clock when Sherlock Holmes left me, but I had notime to be lonely, for within an hour there arrived a confectioner’sman with a very large flat box. This he unpacked with the help of ayouth whom he had brought with him, and presently, to my very greatastonishment, a quite epicurean little cold supper began to be laid outupon our humble lodging-house mahogany. There were a couple of brace ofcold woodcock, a pheasant, a

pâté de foie gras pie, with a group ofancient and cobwebby bottles. Having laid out all these luxuries, mytwo visitors vanished away, like the genii of the Arabian Nights, withno explanation save that the things had been paid for and were orderedto this address.



Just before nine o’clock Sherlock Holmes stepped briskly into the room.

His features were gravely set, but there was a light in his eye whichmade me think that he had not been disappointed in his conclusions.



“They have laid the supper, then,” he said, rubbing his hands.



“You seem to expect company. They have laid for five.”



“Yes, I fancy we may have some company dropping in,” said he. “I amsurprised that Lord St. Simon has not already arrived. Ha! I fancy thatI hear his step now upon the stairs.”



It was indeed our visitor of the morning who came bustling in, danglinghis glasses more vigorously than ever, and with a very perturbedexpression upon his aristocratic features.



“My messenger reached you, then?” asked Holmes.



“Yes, and I confess that the contents startled me beyond measure. Haveyou good authority for what you say?”



“The best possible.”









Lord St. Simon sank into a chair and passed his hand over his forehead.



“What will the duke say,” he murmured, “when he hears that one of thefamily has been subjected to such humiliation?”



“It is the purest accident. I cannot allow that there is anyhumiliation.”



“Ah, you look on these things from another stand-point.”



“I fail to see that any one is to blame. I can hardly see how the ladycould have acted otherwise, though her abrupt method of doing it wasundoubtedly to be regretted. Having no mother, she had no one to adviseher at such a crisis.”



“It was a slight, sir, a public slight,” said Lord St. Simon, tappinghis fingers upon the table.



“You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so unprecedenteda position.”



“I will make no allowance. I am very angry indeed, and I have beenshamefully used.”



“I think that I heard a ring,” said Holmes. “Yes, there are steps onthe landing. If I cannot persuade you to take a lenient view of thematter, Lord St. Simon, I have brought an advocate here who may be moresuccessful.” He opened the door and ushered in a lady and gentleman.

“Lord St. Simon,” said he, “allow me to introduce you to Mr. and Mrs.

Francis Hay Moulton. The lady, I think, you have already met.”



At the sight of these new-comers our client had sprung from his seatand stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand thrust intothe breast of his frock-coat, a picture of offended dignity. The ladyhad taken a quick step forward and had held out her hand to him, buthe still refused to raise his eyes. It was as well for his resolution,

perhaps, for her pleading face was one which it was hard to resist.



“You’re angry, Robert,” said she. “Well, I guess you have every causeto be.”



“Pray make no apology to me,” said Lord St. Simon, bitterly.





“Oh yes, I know that I have treated you real bad, and that I shouldhave spoken to you before I went; but I was kind of rattled, and fromthe time when I saw Frank here again I just didn’t know what I wasdoing or saying. I only wonder I didn’t fall down and do a faint rightthere before the altar.”



“Perhaps, Mrs. Moulton, you would like my friend and me to leave theroom while you explain this matter?”



“If I may give an opinion,” remarked the strange gentleman, “we’ve hadjust a little too much secrecy over this business already. For my part,

I should like all Europe and America to hear the rights of it.” He wasa small, wiry, sunburnt man, clean shaven, with a sharp face and alertmanner.



“Then I’ll tell our story right away,” said the lady. “Frank here and Imet in ’84, in McQuire’s camp, near the Rockies, where pa was workinga claim. We were engaged to each other, Frank and I; but then one dayfather struck a rich pocket and made a pile, while poor Frank here hada claim that petered out and came to nothing. The richer pa grew, thepoorer was Frank; so at last pa wouldn’t hear of our engagement lastingany longer, and he took me away to ’Frisco. Frank wouldn’t throw uphis hand, though; so he followed me there, and he saw me without paknowing anything about it. It would only have made him mad to know, sowe just fixed it all up for ourselves. Frank said that he would go andmake his pile, too, and never come back to claim me until he had asmuch as pa. So then I promised to wait for him to the end of time, andpledged myself not to marry any one else while he lived. ‘Why shouldn’twe be married right away, then,’ said he, ‘and then I will feel sure ofyou; and I won’t claim to be your husband until I come back?’ Well, wetalked it over, and he had fixed it all up so nicely, with a clergymanall ready in waiting, that we just did it right there; and then Frankwent off to seek his fortune, and I went back to pa.





“The next I heard of Frank was that he was in Montana, and then he wentprospecting in Arizona, and then I heard of him from New Mexico. Afterthat came a long newspaper story about how a miners’ camp had beenattacked by Apache Indians, and there was my Frank’s name among thekilled. I fainted dead away, and I was very sick for months after. Pathought I had a decline, and took me to half the doctors in ’Frisco.

Not a word of news came for a year and more, so that I never doubtedthat Frank was really dead. Then Lord St. Simon came to ’Frisco, and wecame to London, and a marriage was arranged, and pa was very pleased,

but I felt all the time that no man on this earth would ever take theplace in my heart that had been given to my poor Frank.



“Still, if I had married Lord St. Simon, of course I’d have done myduty by him. We can’t command our love, but we can our actions. I wentto the altar with him with the intention to make him just as good awife as it was in me to be. But you may imagine what I felt when, justas I came to the altar rails, I glanced back and saw Frank standingand looking at me out of the first pew. I thought it was his ghost atfirst; but when I looked again, there he was still, with a kind ofquestion in his eyes as if to ask me whether I were glad or sorry tosee him. I wonder I didn’t drop. I know that everything was turninground, and the words of the clergyman were just like the buzz of a beein my ear. I didn’t know what to do. Should I stop the service and makea scene in the church? I glanced at him again, and he seemed to knowwhat I was thinking, for he raised his finger to his lips to tell me tobe still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper, and I knew thathe was writing me a note. As I passed his pew on the way out I droppedmy bouquet over to him, and he slipped the note into my hand when hereturned me the flowers. It was only a line asking me to join him whenhe made the sign to me to do so. Of course I never doubted for a momentthat my first duty was now to him, and I determined to do just whateverhe might direct.





“When I got back I told my maid, who had known him in California, andhad always been his friend. I ordered her to say nothing, but to get afew things packed and my ulster ready. I know I ought to have spokento Lord St. Simon, but it was dreadful hard before his mother and allthose great people. I just made up my mind to run away and explainafterwards. I hadn’t been at the table ten minutes before I saw Frankout of the window at the other side of the road. He beckoned to me, andthen began walking into the Park. I slipped out, put on my things, andfollowed him. Some woman came talking something or other about LordSt. Simon to me—seemed to me from the little I heard as if he had alittle secret of his own before marriage also—but I managed to getaway from her, and soon overtook Frank. We got into a cab together, andaway we drove to some lodgings he had taken in Gordon Square, and thatwas my true wedding after all those years of waiting. Frank had been aprisoner among the Apaches, had escaped, came on to ’Frisco, found thatI had given him up for dead and had gone to England, followed me there,

and had come upon me at last on the very morning of my second wedding.”



“I saw it in a paper,” explained the American. “It gave the name andthe church, but not where the lady lived.”



“Then we had a talk as to what we should do, and Frank was all foropenness, but I was so ashamed of it all that I felt as if I shouldlike to vanish away and never see any of them again—just sendinga line to pa, perhaps, to show him that I was alive. It was awfulto me to think of all those lords and ladies sitting round thatbreakfast-table and waiting for me to come back. So Frank took mywedding-clothes and things and made a bundle of them, so that I shouldnot be traced, and dropped them away somewhere where no one could findthem. It is likely that we should have gone on to Paris to-morrow, onlythat this good gentleman, Mr. Holmes, came round to us this evening,

though how he found us is more than I can think, and he showed us veryclearly and kindly that I was wrong and that Frank was right, and thatwe should be putting ourselves in the wrong if we were so secret. Thenhe offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord St. Simon alone, andso we came right away round to his rooms at once. Now, Robert, you haveheard it all, and I am very sorry if I have given you pain, and I hopethat you do not think very meanly of me.”



Lord St. Simon had by no means relaxed his rigid attitude, but hadlistened with a frowning brow and a compressed lip to this longnarrative.



“Excuse me,” he said, “but it is not my custom to discuss my mostintimate personal affairs in this public manner.”



“Then you won’t forgive me? You won’t shake hands before I go?”



“Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure.” He put out his handand coldly grasped that which she extended to him.



“I had hoped,” suggested Holmes, “that you would have joined us in afriendly supper.”



“I think that there you ask a little too much,” responded his lordship.

“I may be forced to acquiesce in these recent developments, but I canhardly be expected to make merry over them. I think that, with your

permission, I will now wish you all a very good-night.” He included usall in a sweeping bow and stalked out of the room.



“Then I trust that you at least will honor me with your company,” saidSherlock Holmes. “It is always a joy to meet an American, Mr. Moulton,

for I am one of those who believe that the folly of a monarch andthe blundering of a minister in far-gone years will not prevent ourchildren from being some day citizens of the same world-wide countryunder a flag which shall be a quartering of the Union Jack with theStars and Stripes.”











“The case has been an interesting one,” remarked Holmes, when ourvisitors had left us, “because it serves to show very clearly howsimple the explanation may be of an affair which at first sight seemsto be almost inexplicable. Nothing could be more natural than thesequence of events as narrated by this lady, and nothing stranger thanthe result when viewed, for instance, by Mr. Lestrade, of ScotlandYard.”







“‘I WILL WISH YOU ALL A VERY GOOD NIGHT.’”











“You were not yourself at fault at all, then?”



“From the first, two facts were very obvious to me, the one that thelady had been quite willing to undergo the wedding ceremony, the otherthat she had repented of it within a few minutes of returning home.

Obviously something had occurred during the morning, then, to cause herto change her mind. What could that something be? She could not havespoken to any one when she was out, for she had been in the companyof the bridegroom. Had she seen some one, then? If she had, it mustbe some one from America, because she had spent so short a time inthis country that she could hardly have allowed any one to acquire sodeep an influence over her that the mere sight of him would induce herto change her plans so completely. You see we have already arrived,

by a process of exclusion, at the idea that she might have seen anAmerican. Then who could this American be, and why should he possess somuch influence over her? It might be a lover; it might be a husband.

Her young womanhood had, I knew, been spent in rough scenes and understrange conditions. So far I had got before I ever heard Lord St.

Simon’s narrative. When he told us of a man in a pew, of the change inthe bride’s manner, of so transparent a device for obtaining a note asthe dropping of a bouquet, of her resort to her confidential maid, andof her very significant allusion to claim-jumping—which in miners’parlance means taking possession of that which another person has aprior claim to—the whole situation became absolutely clear. She hadgone off with a man, and the man was either a lover or was a previoushusband—the chances being in favor of the latter.”



“And how in the world did you find them?”







“It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held information inhis hands the value of which he did not himself know. The initials wereof course of the highest importance, but more valuable still was itto know that within a week he had settled his bill at one of the mostselect London hotels.”



“How did you deduce the select?”



“By the select prices. Eight shillings for a bed and eight-pence for aglass of sherry pointed to one of the most expensive hotels. There arenot many in London which charge at that rate. In the second one whichI visited in Northumberland Avenue, I learned by an inspection of thebook that Francis H. Moulton, an American gentleman, had left only theday before, and on looking over the entries against him, I came uponthe very items which I had seen in the duplicate bill. His letterswere to be forwarded to 226 Gordon Square; so thither I travelled, andbeing fortunate enough to find the loving couple at home, I ventured togive them some paternal advice, and to point out to them that it wouldbe better in every way that they should make their position a littleclearer both to the general public and to Lord St. Simon in particular.

I invited them to meet him here, and, as you see, I made him keep theappointment.”



“But with no very good result,” I remarked. “His conduct was certainlynot very gracious.”



“Ah, Watson,” said Holmes, smiling, “perhaps you would not be verygracious either, if, after all the trouble of wooing and wedding, youfound yourself deprived in an instant of wife and of fortune. I thinkthat we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully, and thank our starsthat we are never likely to find ourselves in the same position. Drawyour chair up, and hand me my violin, for the only problem we havestill to solve is how to while away these bleak autumnal evenings.”







Adventure XI

THE ADVENTURE OF THE BERYL CORONET











“HOLMES,” said I, as I stood one morning in our bow-window looking downthe street, “here is a madman coming along. It seems rather sad thathis relatives should allow him to come out alone.”



My friend rose lazily from his arm-chair and stood with his hands inthe pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It was abright, crisp February morning, and the snow of the day before stilllay deep upon the ground, shimmering brightly in the wintry sun. Downthe centre of Baker Street it had been ploughed into a brown crumblyband by the traffic, but at either side and on the heaped-up edges ofthe foot-paths it still lay as white as when it fell. The gray pavementhad been cleaned and scraped, but was still dangerously slippery, sothat there were fewer passengers than usual. Indeed, from the directionof the Metropolitan Station no one was coming save the single gentlemanwhose eccentric conduct had drawn my attention.



He was a man of about fifty, tall, portly, and imposing, with amassive, strongly marked face and a commanding figure. He was dressedin a sombre yet rich style, in black frock-coat, shining hat, neatbrown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-gray trousers. Yet his actions werein absurd contrast to the dignity of his dress and features, for hewas running hard, with occasional little springs, such as a weary mangives who is little accustomed to set any tax upon his legs. As he ranhe jerked his hands up and down, waggled his head, and writhed his faceinto the most extraordinary contortions.







“What on earth can be the matter with him?” I asked. “He is looking upat the numbers of the houses.”



“I believe that he is coming here,” said Holmes, rubbing his hands.



“Here?”



“Yes; I rather think he is coming to consult me professionally. I thinkthat I recognize the symptoms. Ha! did I not tell you?” As he spoke,

the man, puffing and blowing, rushed at our door and pulled at our belluntil the whole house resounded with the clanging.



A few moments later he was in our room, still puffing, stillgesticulating, but with so fixed a look of grief and despair in hiseyes that our smiles were turned in an instant to horror and pity. Fora while he could not get his words out, but swayed his body and pluckedat his hair like one who has been driven to the extreme limits of hisreason. Then, suddenly springing to his feet, he beat his head againstthe wall with such force that we both rushed upon him and tore him awayto the centre of the room. Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into theeasy-chair, and, sitting beside him, patted his hand, and chatted withhim in the easy, soothing tones which he knew so well how to employ.



“You have come to me to tell your story, have you not?” said he. “Youare fatigued with your haste. Pray wait until you have recoveredyourself, and then I shall be most happy to look into any littleproblem which you may submit to me.”



The man sat for a minute or more with a heaving chest, fighting againsthis emotion. Then he passed his handkerchief over his brow, set hislips tight, and turned his face towards us.



“No doubt you think me mad?” said he.



“I see that you have had some great trouble,” responded Holmes.



“God knows I have!—a trouble which is enough to unseat my reason,

so sudden and so terrible is it. Public disgrace I might have faced,

although I am a man whose character has never yet borne a stain.

Private affliction also is the lot of every man; but the two comingtogether, and in so frightful a form, have been enough to shake my verysoul. Besides, it is not I alone. The very noblest in the land maysuffer, unless some way be found out of this horrible affair.”



“Pray compose yourself, sir,” said Holmes, “and let me have a clearaccount of who you are, and what it is that has befallen you.”



“My name,” answered our visitor, “is probably familiar to your ears.

I am Alexander Holder, of the banking firm of Holder & Stevenson, ofThreadneedle Street.”



The name was indeed well known to us as belonging to the senior partnerin the second largest private banking concern in the City of London.

What could have happened, then, to bring one of the foremost citizensof London to this most pitiable pass? We waited, all curiosity, untilwith another effort he braced himself to tell his story.



“I feel that time is of value,” said he; “that is why I hastenedhere when the police inspector suggested that I should secure yourco-operation. I came to Baker Street by the Underground, and hurriedfrom there on foot, for the cabs go slowly through this snow. Thatis why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who takes very littleexercise. I feel better now, and I will put the facts before you asshortly and yet as clearly as I can.



“It is, of course, well known to you that in a successful bankingbusiness as much depends upon our being able to find remunerativeinvestments for our funds as upon our increasing our connection and thenumber of our depositors. One of our most lucrative means of laying outmoney is in the shape of loans, where the security is unimpeachable. Wehave done a good deal in this direction during the last few years, andthere are many noble families to whom we have advanced large sums uponthe security of their pictures, libraries, or plate.



“Yesterday morning I was seated in my office at the bank when a cardwas brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I saw thename, for it was that of none other than—well, perhaps even to you Ihad better say no more than that it was a name which is a householdword all over the earth—one of the highest, noblest, most exaltednames in England. I was overwhelmed by the honor, and attempted, whenhe entered, to say so, but he plunged at once into business with theair of a man who wishes to hurry quickly through a disagreeable task.



“‘Mr. Holder,’ said he, ‘I have been informed that you are in the habitof advancing money.’



“‘The firm do so when the security is good,’ I answered.



“‘It is absolutely essential to me,’ said he, ‘that I should have£50,000 at once. I could of course borrow so trifling a sum tentimes over from my friends, but I much prefer to make it a matter ofbusiness, and to carry out that business myself. In my position youcan readily understand that it is unwise to place one’s self underobligations.’



“‘For how long, may I ask, do you want this sum?’ I asked.



“‘Next Monday I have a large sum due to me, and I shall then mostcertainly repay what you advance, with whatever interest you think itright to charge. But it is very essential to me that the money shouldbe paid at once.’



“‘I should be happy to advance it without further parley from my ownprivate purse,’ said I, ‘were it not that the strain would be rathermore than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do it in thename of the firm, then in justice to my partner I must insist that,

even in your case, every business-like precaution should be taken.’



“‘I should much prefer to have it so,’ said he, raising up a square,

black morocco case which he had laid beside his chair. ‘You havedoubtless heard of the Beryl Coronet?’



“‘One of the most precious public possessions of the empire,’ said I.



“‘Precisely.’ He opened the case, and there, imbedded in soft,

flesh-colored velvet, lay the magnificent piece of jewelry which hehad named. ‘There are thirty-nine enormous beryls,’ said he, ‘and theprice of the gold chasing is incalculable. The lowest estimate wouldput the worth of the coronet at double the sum which I have asked. I amprepared to leave it with you as my security.’



“I took the precious case into my hands and looked in some perplexityfrom it to my illustrious client.



“‘You doubt its value?’ he asked.



“‘Not at all. I only doubt—’



“‘The propriety of my leaving it. You may set your mind at rest aboutthat. I should not dream of doing so were it not absolutely certainthat I should be able in four days to reclaim it. It is a pure matterof form. Is the security sufficient?’



“‘Ample.’



“‘You understand, Mr. Holder, that I am giving you a strong proof ofthe confidence which I have in you, founded upon all that I have heardof you. I rely upon you not only to be discreet and to refrain from allgossip upon the matter, but, above all, to preserve this coronet withevery possible precaution, because I need not say that a great publicscandal would be caused if any harm were to befall it. Any injury toit would be almost as serious as its complete loss, for there are noberyls in the world to match these, and it would be impossible toreplace them. I leave it with you, however, with every confidence, andI shall call for it in person on Monday morning.’



“Seeing that my client was anxious to leave, I said no more; but,

calling for my cashier, I ordered him to pay over fifty £1000 notes.

When I was alone once more, however, with the precious case lying uponthe table in front of me, I could not but think with some misgivings ofthe immense responsibility which it entailed upon me. There could be nodoubt that, as it was a national possession, a horrible scandal wouldensue if any misfortune should occur to it. I already regretted havingever consented to take charge of it. However, it was too late to alterthe matter now, so I locked it up in my private safe, and turned oncemore to my work.



“When evening came I felt that it would be an imprudence to leave soprecious a thing in the office behind me. Bankers’ safes had beenforced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how terriblewould be the position in which I should find myself! I determined,

therefore, that for the next few days I would always carry the casebackward and forward with me, so that it might never be really outof my reach. With this intention, I called a cab, and drove out tomy house at Streatham, carrying the jewel with me. I did not breathefreely until I had taken it up-stairs and locked it in the bureau of mydressing-room.



“And now a word as to my household, Mr. Holmes, for I wish you tothoroughly understand the situation. My groom and my page sleep out ofthe house, and may be set aside altogether. I have three maid-servantswho have been with me a number of years, and whose absolute reliabilityis quite above suspicion. Another, Lucy Parr, the second waiting-maid,

has only been in my service a few months. She came with an excellentcharacter, however, and has always given me satisfaction. She is a verypretty girl, and has attracted admirers who have occasionally hungabout the place. That is the only drawback which we have found to her,

but we believe her to be a thoroughly good girl in every way.



“So much for the servants. My family itself is so small that it willnot take me long to describe it. I am a widower, and have an only son,

Arthur. He has been a disappointment to me, Mr. Holmes—a grievousdisappointment. I have no doubt that I am myself to blame. People tellme that I have spoiled him. Very likely I have. When my dear wife diedI felt that he was all I had to love. I could not bear to see the smilefade even for a moment from his face. I have never denied him a wish.

Perhaps it would have been better for both of us had I been sterner,

but I meant it for the best.



“It was naturally my intention that he should succeed me in mybusiness, but he was not of a business turn. He was wild, wayward, and,

to speak the truth, I could not trust him in the handling of largesums of money. When he was young he became a member of an aristocraticclub, and there, having charming manners, he was soon the intimate of anumber of men with long purses and expensive habits. He learned to playheavily at cards and to squander money on the turf, until he had againand again to come to me and implore me to give him an advance upon hisallowance, that he might settle his debts of honor. He tried more thanonce to break away from the dangerous company which he was keeping, buteach time the influence of his friend Sir George Burnwell was enough todraw him back again.



“And, indeed, I could not wonder that such a man as Sir George Burnwellshould gain an influence over him, for he has frequently brought himto my house, and I have found myself that I could hardly resist thefascination of his manner. He is older than Arthur, a man of the worldto his finger-tips, one who had been everywhere, seen everything, abrilliant talker, and a man of great personal beauty. Yet when I thinkof him in cold blood, far away from the glamour of his presence, I amconvinced from his cynical speech, and the look which I have caught inhis eyes, that he is one who should be deeply distrusted. So I think,

and so, too, thinks my little Mary, who has a woman’s quick insightinto character.



“And now there is only she to be described. She is my niece; but whenmy brother died five years ago and left her alone in the world Iadopted her, and have looked upon her ever since as my daughter. She isa sunbeam in my house—sweet, loving, beautiful, a wonderful managerand house-keeper, yet as tender and quiet and gentle as a woman couldbe. She is my right hand. I do not know what I could do without her. Inonly one matter has she ever gone against my wishes. Twice my boy hasasked her to marry him, for he loves her devotedly, but each time shehas refused him. I think that if any one could have drawn him into theright path it would have been she, and that his marriage might havechanged his whole life; but now, alas! it is too late—for ever toolate!



“Now, Mr. Holmes, you know the people who live under my roof, and Ishall continue with my miserable story.



“When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night, afterdinner, I told Arthur and Mary my experience, and of the precioustreasure which we had under our roof, suppressing only the name of myclient. Lucy Parr, who had brought in the coffee, had, I am sure, leftthe room; but I cannot swear that the door was closed. Mary and Arthurwere much interested, and wished to see the famous coronet, but Ithought it better not to disturb it.



“‘Where have you put it?’ asked Arthur.



“‘In my own bureau.’



“‘Well, I hope to goodness the house won’t be burgled during thenight,’ said he.



“‘It is locked up,’ I answered.



“‘Oh, any old key will fit that bureau. When I was a youngster I haveopened it myself with the key of the box-room cupboard.’



“He often had a wild way of talking, so that I thought little of whathe said. He followed me to my room, however, that night with a verygrave face.



“‘Look here, dad,’ said he, with his eyes cast down, ‘can you let mehave £200?’



“‘No, I cannot!’ I answered, sharply. ‘I have been far too generouswith you in money matters.’



“‘You have been very kind,’ said he: ‘but I must have this money, orelse I can never show my face inside the club again.’



“‘And a very good thing, too!’ I cried.



“‘Yes, but you would not have me leave it a dishonored man,’ said he.

‘I could not bear the disgrace. I must raise the money in some way, andif you will not let me have it, then I must try other means.’





“I was very angry, for this was the third demand during the month. ‘Youshall not have a farthing from me,’ I cried; on which he bowed and leftthe room without another word.



“When he was gone I unlocked my bureau, made sure that my treasure wassafe, and locked it again. Then I started to go round the house to seethat all was secure—a duty which I usually leave to Mary, but which Ithought it well to perform myself that night. As I came down the stairsI saw Mary herself at the side window of the hall, which she closed andfastened as I approached.



“‘Tell me, dad,’ said she, looking, I thought, a little disturbed, ‘didyou give Lucy, the maid, leave to go out to-night?’



“‘Certainly not.’



“‘She came in just now by the back door. I have no doubt that she hasonly been to the side gate to see some one; but I think that it ishardly safe, and should be stopped.”



“‘You must speak to her in the morning, or I will, if you prefer it.

Are you sure that everything is fastened?’



“‘Quite sure, dad.’



“‘Then, good-night.’ I kissed her, and went up to my bedroom again,

where I was soon asleep.



“I am endeavoring to tell you everything, Mr. Holmes, which may haveany bearing upon the case, but I beg that you will question me upon anypoint which I do not make clear.”



“On the contrary, your statement is singularly lucid.”



“I come to a part of my story now in which I should wish to beparticularly so. I am not a very heavy sleeper, and the anxiety in mymind tended, no doubt, to make me even less so than usual. About twoin the morning, then, I was awakened by some sound in the house. Ithad ceased ere I was wide awake, but it had left an impression behindit as though a window had gently closed somewhere. I lay listeningwith all my ears. Suddenly, to my horror, there was a distinct soundof footsteps moving softly in the next room. I slipped out of bed, allpalpitating with fear, and peeped round the corner of my dressing-roomdoor.





“‘Arthur!’ I screamed, ‘you villain! you thief! How dare you touch thatcoronet?’



“The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy, dressedonly in his shirt and trousers, was standing beside the light, holdingthe coronet in his hands. He appeared to be wrenching at it, or bendingit with all his strength. At my cry he dropped it from his grasp, andturned as pale as death. I snatched it up and examined it. One of thegold corners, with three of the beryls in it, was missing.



“‘You blackguard!’ I shouted, beside myself with rage. ‘You havedestroyed it! You have dishonored me for ever! Where are the jewelswhich you have stolen?’



“‘Stolen!’ he cried.



“‘Yes, you thief!’ I roared, shaking him by the shoulder.



“‘There are none missing. There cannot be any missing,’ said he.



“‘There are three missing. And you know where they are. Must I call youa liar as well as a thief? Did I not see you trying to tear off anotherpiece?’



“‘You have called me names enough,’ said he; ‘I will not stand it anylonger. I shall not say another word about this business since you havechosen to insult me. I will leave your house in the morning and make myown way in the world.’



“‘You shall leave it in the hands of the police!’ I cried, half-madwith grief and rage. ‘I shall have this matter probed to the bottom.’



“‘You shall learn nothing from me,’ said he, with a passion such as Ishould not have thought was in his nature. ‘If you choose to call thepolice, let the police find what they can.’



“By this time the whole house was astir, for I had raised my voice inmy anger. Mary was the first to rush into my room, and, at the sight ofthe coronet and of Arthur’s face, she read the whole story, and, witha scream, fell down senseless on the ground. I sent the house-maid forthe police, and put the investigation into their hands at once. Whenthe inspector and a constable entered the house, Arthur, who had stoodsullenly with his arms folded, asked me whether it was my intention tocharge him with theft. I answered that it had ceased to be a privatematter, but had become a public one, since the ruined coronet wasnational property. I was determined that the law should have its way ineverything.



“‘At least,’ said he, ‘you will not have me arrested at once. It wouldbe to your advantage as well as mine if I might leave the house forfive minutes.’



“‘That you may get away, or perhaps that you may conceal what you havestolen,’ said I. And then realizing the dreadful position in which Iwas placed, I implored him to remember that not only my honor, but thatof one who was far greater than I was at stake; and that he threatenedto raise a scandal which would convulse the nation. He might avert itall if he would but tell me what he had done with the three missingstones.



“‘You may as well face the matter,’ said I; ‘you have been caught inthe act, and no confession could make your guilt more heinous. If youbut make such reparation as is in your power, by telling us where theberyls are, all shall be forgiven and forgotten.’



“‘Keep your forgiveness for those who ask for it,’ he answered, turningaway from me, with a sneer. I saw that he was too hardened for anywords of mine to influence him. There was but one way for it. I calledin the inspector, and gave him into custody. A search was made at once,

not only of his person, but of his room, and of every portion of thehouse where he could possibly have concealed the gems; but no trace ofthem could be found, nor would the wretched boy open his mouth for allour persuasions and our threats. This morning he was removed to a cell,

and I, after going through all the police formalities, have hurriedround to you, to implore you to use your skill in unravelling thematter. The police have openly confessed that they can at present makenothing of it. You may go to any expense which you think necessary. Ihave already offered a reward of £1000. My God, what shall I do! I havelost my honor, my gems, and my son in one night. Oh, what shall I do!”



He put a hand on either side of his head, and rocked himself to andfro, droning to himself like a child whose grief has got beyond words.



Sherlock Holmes sat silent for some few minutes, with his brows knittedand his eyes fixed upon the fire.



“Do you receive much company?” he asked.



“None, save my partner with his family, and an occasional friend ofArthur’s. Sir George Burnwell has been several times lately. No oneelse, I think.”



“Do you go out much in society?”



“Arthur does. Mary and I stay at home. We neither of us care for it.”



“That is unusual in a young girl.”



“She is of a quiet nature. Besides, she is not so very young. She isfour-and-twenty.”



“This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to heralso.”



“Terrible! She is even more affected than I.”



“You have neither of you any doubt as to your son’s guilt?”



“How can we have, when I saw him with my own eyes with the coronet inhis hands.”



“I hardly consider that a conclusive proof. Was the remainder of thecoronet at all injured?”



“Yes, it was twisted.”



“Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to straightenit?”



“God bless you! You are doing what you can for him and for me. But itis too heavy a task. What was he doing there at all? If his purposewere innocent, why did he not say so?”



“Precisely. And if it were guilty, why did he not invent a lie? Hissilence appears to me to cut both ways. There are several singularpoints about the case. What did the police think of the noise whichawoke you from your sleep?”



“They considered that it might be caused by Arthur’s closing hisbedroom door.”



“A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door so asto wake a household. What did they say, then, of the disappearance ofthese gems?”



“They are still sounding the planking and probing the furniture in thehope of finding them.”



“Have they thought of looking outside the house?”



“Yes, they have shown extraordinary energy. The whole garden hasalready been minutely examined.”



“Now, my dear sir,” said Holmes, “is it not obvious to you now thatthis matter really strikes very much deeper than either you or thepolice were at first inclined to think? It appeared to you to be asimple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider what isinvolved by your theory. You suppose that your son came down from hisbed, went, at great risk, to your dressing-room, opened your bureau,

took out your coronet, broke off by main force a small portion ofit, went off to some other place, concealed three gems out of thethirty-nine, with such skill that nobody can find them, and thenreturned with the other thirty-six into the room in which he exposedhimself to the greatest danger of being discovered. I ask you now, issuch a theory tenable?”



“But what other is there?” cried the banker, with a gesture of despair.

“If his motives were innocent, why does he not explain them?”



“It is our task to find that out,” replied Holmes; “so now, if youplease, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together, and devotean hour to glancing a little more closely into details.”



My friend insisted upon my accompanying them in their expedition,

which I was eager enough to do, for my curiosity and sympathy weredeeply stirred by the story to which we had listened. I confess thatthe guilt of the banker’s son appeared to me to be as obvious as itdid to his unhappy father, but still I had such faith in Holmes’sjudgment that I felt that there must be some grounds for hope as longas he was dissatisfied with the accepted explanation. He hardly spokea word the whole way out to the southern suburb, but sat with his chinupon his breast and his hat drawn over his eyes, sunk in the deepestthought. Our client appeared to have taken fresh heart at the littleglimpse of hope which had been presented to him, and he even broke intoa desultory chat with me over his business affairs. A short railwayjourney and a shorter walk brought us to Fairbank, the modest residenceof the great financier.



Fairbank was a good-sized square house of white stone, standing backa little from the road. A double carriage-sweep, with a snow-cladlawn, stretched down in front to two large iron gates which closed theentrance. On the right side was a small wooden thicket, which led intoa narrow path between two neat hedges stretching from the road to thekitchen door, and forming the tradesmen’s entrance. On the left ran alane which led to the stables, and was not itself within the groundsat all, being a public, though little used, thoroughfare. Holmes leftus standing at the door, and walked slowly all round the house, acrossthe front, down the tradesmen’s path, and so round by the garden behindinto the stable lane. So long was he that Mr. Holder and I went intothe dining-room and waited by the fire until he should return. We weresitting there in silence when the door opened and a young lady came in.

She was rather above the middle height, slim, with dark hair and eyes,

which seemed the darker against the absolute pallor of her skin. I donot think that I have ever seen such deadly paleness in a woman’s face.

Her lips, too, were bloodless, but her eyes were flushed with crying.

As she swept silently into the room she impressed me with a greatersense of grief than the banker had done in the morning, and it was themore striking in her as she was evidently a woman of strong character,

with immense capacity for self-restraint. Disregarding my presence,

she went straight to her uncle, and passed her hand over his head witha sweet womanly caress.



“You have given orders that Arthur should be liberated, have you not,

dad?” she asked.



“No, no, my girl, the matter must be probed to the bottom.”



“But I am so sure that he is innocent. You know what women’s instinctsare. I know that he has done no harm and that you will be sorry forhaving acted so harshly.”



“Why is he silent, then, if he is innocent?”



“Who knows? Perhaps because he was so angry that you should suspecthim.”



“How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with thecoronet in his hand?”



“Oh, but he had only picked it up to look at it. Oh do, do take my wordfor it that he is innocent. Let the matter drop and say no more. It isso dreadful to think of our dear Arthur in prison!”



“I shall never let it drop until the gems are found—never, Mary! Youraffection for Arthur blinds you as to the awful consequences to me. Farfrom hushing the thing up, I have brought a gentleman down from Londonto inquire more deeply into it.”



“This gentleman?” she asked, facing round to me.



“No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in thestable lane now.”



“The stable lane?” She raised her dark eyebrows. “What can he hope tofind there? Ah! this, I suppose, is he. I trust, sir, that you willsucceed in proving, what I feel sure is the truth, that my cousinArthur is innocent of this crime.”



“I fully share your opinion, and I trust, with you, that we may proveit,” returned Holmes, going back to the mat to knock the snow from hisshoes. “I believe I have the honor of addressing Miss Mary Holder.

Might I ask you a question or two?”



“Pray do, sir, if it may help to clear this horrible affair up.”



“You heard nothing yourself last night?”





“Nothing, until my uncle here began to speak loudly. I heard that, andI came down.”



“You shut up the windows and doors the night before. Did you fasten allthe windows?”



“Yes.”



“Were they all fastened this morning?”



“Yes.”



“You have a maid who has a sweetheart? I think that you remarked toyour uncle last night that she had been out to see him?”



“Yes, and she was the girl who waited in the drawing-room, and who mayhave heard uncle’s remarks about the coronet.”



“I see. You infer that she may have gone out to tell her sweetheart,

and that the two may have planned the robbery.”



“But what is the good of all these vague theories,” cried the banker,

impatiently, “when I have told you that I saw Arthur with the coronetin his hands?”



“Wait a little, Mr. Holder. We must come back to that. About this girl,

Miss Holder. You saw her return by the kitchen door, I presume?”



“Yes; when I went to see if the door was fastened for the night I mether slipping in. I saw the man, too, in the gloom.”



“Do you know him?”



“Oh yes; he is the green-grocer who brings our vegetables round. Hisname is Francis Prosper.”



“He stood,” said Holmes, “to the left of the door—that is to say,

farther up the path than is necessary to reach the door?”



“Yes, he did.”



“And he is a man with a wooden leg?”



Something like fear sprang up in the young lady’s expressive blackeyes. “Why, you are like a magician,” said she. “How do you know that?”She smiled, but there was no answering smile in Holmes’s thin, eagerface.



“I should be very glad now to go up-stairs,” said he. “I shall probablywish to go over the outside of the house again. Perhaps I had bettertake a look at the lower windows before I go up.”



He walked swiftly round from one to the other, pausing only at thelarge one which looked from the hall onto the stable lane. This heopened, and made a very careful examination of the sill with hispowerful magnifying lens. “Now we shall go up-stairs,” said he, at last.



The banker’s dressing-room was a plainly furnished little chamber, witha gray carpet, a large bureau, and a long mirror. Holmes went to thebureau first and looked hard at the lock.



“Which key was used to open it?” he asked.



“That which my son himself indicated—that of the cupboard of thelumber-room.”



“Have you it here?”



“That is it on the dressing-table.”



Sherlock Holmes took it up and opened the bureau.



“It is a noiseless lock,” said he. “It is no wonder that it did notwake you. This case, I presume, contains the coronet. We must have alook at it.” He opened the case, and, taking out the diadem, he laid itupon the table. It was a magnificent specimen of the jeweller’s art,

and the thirty-six stones were the finest that I have ever seen. At oneside of the coronet was a cracked edge, where a corner holding threegems had been torn away.



“Now, Mr. Holder,” said Holmes, “here is the corner which correspondsto that which has been so unfortunately lost. Might I beg that you willbreak it off.”



The banker recoiled in horror. “I should not dream of trying,” said he.



“Then I will.” Holmes suddenly bent his strength upon it, but withoutresult. “I feel it give a little,” said he; “but, though I amexceptionally strong in the fingers, it would take me all my time tobreak it. An ordinary man could not do it. Now, what do you think wouldhappen if I did break it, Mr. Holder? There would be a noise like apistol shot. Do you tell me that all this happened within a few yardsof your bed, and that you heard nothing of it?”



“I do not know what to think. It is all dark to me.”



“But perhaps it may grow lighter as we go. What do you think, MissHolder?”



“I confess that I still share my uncle’s perplexity.”



“Your son had no shoes or slippers on when you saw him?”



“He had nothing on save only his trousers and shirt.”



“Thank you. We have certainly been favored with extraordinary luckduring this inquiry, and it will be entirely our own fault if we do notsucceed in clearing the matter up. With your permission, Mr. Holder, Ishall now continue my investigations outside.”



He went alone, at his own request, for he explained that anyunnecessary footmarks might make his task more difficult. For an houror more he was at work, returning at last with his feet heavy with snowand his features as inscrutable as ever.



“I think that I have seen now all that there is to see, Mr. Holder,”said he; “I can serve you best by returning to my rooms.”



“But the gems, Mr. Holmes. Where are they?”



“I cannot tell.”



The banker wrung his hands. “I shall never see them again!” he cried.

“And my son? You give me hopes?”



“My opinion is in no way altered.”



“Then, for God’s sake, what was this dark business which was acted inmy house last night?”



“If you can call upon me at my Baker Street rooms to-morrow morningbetween nine and ten I shall be happy to do what I can to make itclearer. I understand that you give me carte blanche to act for you,

provided only that I get back the gems, and that you place no limit onthe sum I may draw.”



“I would give my fortune to have them back.”



“Very good. I shall look into the matter between this and then.

Good-bye; it is just possible that I may have to come over here againbefore evening.”



It was obvious to me that my companion’s mind was now made up aboutthe case, although what his conclusions were was more than I couldeven dimly imagine. Several times during our homeward journey Iendeavored to sound him upon the point, but he always glided away tosome other topic, until at last I gave it over in despair. It was notyet three when we found ourselves in our room once more. He hurried tohis chamber, and was down again in a few minutes dressed as a commonloafer. With his collar turned up, his shiny, seedy coat, his redcravat, and his worn boots, he was a perfect sample of the class.



“I think that this should do,” said he, glancing into the glass abovethe fireplace. “I only wish that you could come with me, Watson, butI fear that it won’t do. I may be on the trail in this matter, or Imay be following a will-of-the-wisp, but I shall soon know which itis. I hope that I may be back in a few hours.” He cut a slice of beeffrom the joint upon the sideboard, sandwiched it between two rounds ofbread, and, thrusting this rude meal into his pocket, he started offupon his expedition.



I had just finished my tea when he returned, evidently in excellentspirits, swinging an old elastic-sided boot in his hand. He chucked itdown into a corner and helped himself to a cup of tea.



“I only looked in as I passed,” said he. “I am going right on.”



“Where to?”



“Oh, to the other side of the West End. It may be some time before Iget back. Don’t wait up for me in case I should be late.”



“How are you getting on?”



“Oh, so so. Nothing to complain of. I have been out to Streatham sinceI saw you last, but I did not call at the house. It is a very sweetlittle problem, and I would not have missed it for a good deal.

However, I must not sit gossiping here, but must get these disreputableclothes off and return to my highly respectable self.”



I could see by his manner that he had stronger reasons for satisfactionthan his words alone would imply. His eyes twinkled, and there was evena touch of color upon his sallow cheeks. He hastened up-stairs, and afew minutes later I heard the slam of the hall door, which told me thathe was off once more upon his congenial hunt.



I waited until midnight, but there was no sign of his return, so Iretired to my room. It was no uncommon thing for him to be away fordays and nights on end when he was hot upon a scent, so that hislateness caused me no surprise. I do not know at what hour he came in,

but when I came down to breakfast in the morning, there he was with acup of coffee in one hand and the paper in the other, as fresh and trimas possible.



“You will excuse my beginning without you, Watson,” said he; “but youremember that our client has rather an early appointment this morning.”



“Why, it is after nine now,” I answered. “I should not be surprised ifthat were he. I thought I heard a ring.”



It was, indeed, our friend the financier. I was shocked by the changewhich had come over him, for his face, which was naturally of a broadand massive mould, was now pinched and fallen in, while his hair seemedto me at least a shade whiter. He entered with a weariness and lethargywhich was even more painful than his violence of the morning before,

and he dropped heavily into the arm-chair which I pushed forward forhim.



“I do not know what I have done to be so severely tried,” said he.

“Only two days ago I was a happy and prosperous man, without a care inthe world. Now I am left to a lonely and dishonored age. One sorrowcomes close upon the heels of another. My niece, Mary, has deserted me.”



“Deserted you?”





“Yes. Her bed this morning had not been slept in, her room was empty,

and a note for me lay upon the hall table. I had said to her lastnight, in sorrow and not in anger, that if she had married my boy allmight have been well with him. Perhaps it was thoughtless of me to sayso. It is to that remark that she refers in this note:



“‘My dearest Uncle,—I feel that I have brought troubleupon you, and that if I had acted differently this terriblemisfortune might never have occurred. I cannot, with thisthought in my mind, ever again be happy under your roof, andI feel that I must leave you for ever. Do not worry about myfuture, for that is provided for; and, above all, do not searchfor me, for it will be fruitless labor and an ill-service tome. In life or in death, I am ever your loving



Mary.’











“What could she mean by that note, Mr. Holmes? Do you think it pointsto suicide?”



“No, no, nothing of the kind. It is perhaps the best possible solution.

I trust, Mr. Holder, that you are nearing the end of your troubles.”



“Ha! You say so! You have heard something, Mr. Holmes; you have learnedsomething! Where are the gems?”



“You would not think £1000 apiece an excessive sum for them?”



“I would pay ten.”



“That would be unnecessary. Three thousand will cover the matter. Andthere is a little reward, I fancy. Have you your check-book? Here is apen. Better make it out for £4000 pounds.”



With a dazed face the banker made out the required check. Holmes walkedover to his desk, took out a little triangular piece of gold with threegems in it, and threw it down upon the table.



With a shriek of joy our client clutched it up.



“You have it!” he gasped. “I am saved! I am saved!”





The reaction of joy was as passionate as his grief had been, and hehugged his recovered gems to his bosom.



“There is one other thing you owe, Mr. Holder,” said Sherlock Holmes,

rather sternly.



“Owe!” He caught up a pen. “Name the sum, and I will pay it.”



“No, the debt is not to me. You owe a very humble apology to that noblelad, your son, who has carried himself in this matter as I should beproud to see my own son do, should I ever chance to have one.”



“Then it was not Arthur who took them?”



“I told you yesterday, and I repeat to-day, that it was not.”



“You are sure of it! Then let us hurry to him at once, to let him knowthat the truth is known.”



“He knows it already. When I had cleared it all up I had an interviewwith him, and, finding that he would not tell me the story, I told itto him, on which he had to confess that I was right, and to add thevery few details which were not yet quite clear to me. Your news ofthis morning, however, may open his lips.”



“For Heaven’s sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary mystery!”



“I will do so, and I will show you the steps by which I reached it. Andlet me say to you, first, that which it is hardest for me to say andfor you to hear: there has been an understanding between Sir GeorgeBurnwell and your niece Mary. They have now fled together.”



“My Mary? Impossible!”



“It is, unfortunately, more than possible; it is certain. Neither younor your son knew the true character of this man when you admittedhim into your family circle. He is one of the most dangerous men inEngland—a ruined gambler, an absolutely desperate villain, a manwithout heart or conscience. Your niece knew nothing of such men. Whenhe breathed his vows to her, as he had done to a hundred before her,

she flattered herself that she alone had touched his heart. The devilknows best what he said, but at least she became his tool, and was inthe habit of seeing him nearly every evening.”



“I cannot, and I will not, believe it!” cried the banker, with an ashenface.



“I will tell you, then, what occurred in your house last night. Yourniece, when you had, as she thought, gone to your room, slipped downand talked to her lover through the window which leads into the stablelane. His footmarks had pressed right through the snow, so long hadhe stood there. She told him of the coronet. His wicked lust for goldkindled at the news, and he bent her to his will. I have no doubtthat she loved you, but there are women in whom the love of a loverextinguishes all other loves, and I think that she must have been one.

She had hardly listened to his instructions when she saw you comingdown-stairs, on which she closed the window rapidly, and told you aboutone of the servants’ escapade with her wooden-legged lover, which wasall perfectly true.



“Your boy, Arthur, went to bed after his interview with you, buthe slept badly on account of his uneasiness about his club debts.

In the middle of the night he heard a soft tread pass his door, sohe rose, and looking out, was surprised to see his cousin walkingvery stealthily along the passage, until she disappeared into yourdressing-room. Petrified with astonishment, the lad slipped on someclothes, and waited there in the dark to see what would come of thisstrange affair. Presently she emerged from the room again, and in thelight of the passage-lamp your son saw that she carried the preciouscoronet in her hands. She passed down the stairs, and he, thrillingwith horror, ran along and slipped behind the curtain near your door,

whence he could see what passed in the hall beneath. He saw herstealthily open the window, hand out the coronet to some one in thegloom, and then closing it once more hurry back to her room, passingquite close to where he stood hid behind the curtain.



“As long as she was on the scene he could not take any action withouta horrible exposure of the woman whom he loved. But the instant thatshe was gone he realized how crushing a misfortune this would be foryou, and how all-important it was to set it right. He rushed down, justas he was, in his bare feet, opened the window, sprang out into thesnow, and ran down the lane, where he could see a dark figure in themoonlight. Sir George Burnwell tried to get away, but Arthur caughthim, and there was a struggle between them, your lad tugging at oneside of the coronet, and his opponent at the other. In the scuffle,

your son struck Sir George, and cut him over the eye. Then somethingsuddenly snapped, and your son, finding that he had the coronet in hishands, rushed back, closed the window, ascended to your room, and hadjust observed that the coronet had been twisted in the struggle, andwas endeavoring to straighten it when you appeared upon the scene.”



“Is it possible?” gasped the banker.



“You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when hefelt that he had deserved your warmest thanks. He could not explainthe true state of affairs without betraying one who certainly deservedlittle enough consideration at his hands. He took the more chivalrousview, however, and preserved her secret.”



“And that was why she shrieked and fainted when she saw the coronet,”cried Mr. Holder. “Oh, my God! what a blind fool I have been! And hisasking to be allowed to go out for five minutes! The dear fellow wantedto see if the missing piece were at the scene of the struggle. Howcruelly I have misjudged him!”



“When I arrived at the house,” continued Holmes, “I at once went verycarefully round it to observe if there were any traces in the snowwhich might help me. I knew that none had fallen since the eveningbefore, and also that there had been a strong frost to preserveimpressions. I passed along the tradesmen’s path, but found it alltrampled down and indistinguishable. Just beyond it, however, at thefar side of the kitchen door, a woman had stood and talked with a man,

whose round impressions on one side showed that he had a wooden leg.

I could even tell that they had been disturbed, for the woman had runback swiftly to the door, as was shown by the deep toe and light heelmarks, while Wooden-leg had waited a little, and then had gone away.

I thought at the time that this might be the maid and her sweetheart,

of whom you had already spoken to me, and inquiry showed it was so.

I passed round the garden without seeing anything more than randomtracks, which I took to be the police; but when I got into the stablelane a very long and complex story was written in the snow in front ofme.



“There was a double line of tracks of a booted man, and a second doubleline which I saw with delight belonged to a man with naked feet. I wasat once convinced from what you had told me that the latter was yourson. The first had walked both ways, but the other had run swiftly,

and, as his tread was marked in places over the depression of the boot,

it was obvious that he had passed after the other. I followed them up,

and found that they led to the hall window, where Boots had worn allthe snow away while waiting. Then I walked to the other end, which wasa hundred yards or more down the lane. I saw where Boots had facedround, where the snow was cut up as though there had been a struggle,

and, finally, where a few drops of blood had fallen, to show me that Iwas not mistaken. Boots had then run down the lane, and another littlesmudge of blood showed that it was he who had been hurt. When he cameto the high-road at the other end, I found that the pavement had beencleared, so there was an end to that clew.



“On entering the house, however, I examined, as you remember, the silland framework of the hall window with my lens, and I could at oncesee that some one had passed out. I could distinguish the outline ofan instep where the wet foot had been placed in coming in. I was thenbeginning to be able to form an opinion as to what had occurred. A manhad waited outside the window, some one had brought the gems; the deedhad been overseen by your son, he had pursued the thief, had struggledwith him, they had each tugged at the coronet, their united strengthcausing injuries which neither alone could have effected. He hadreturned with the prize, but had left a fragment in the grasp of hisopponent. So far I was clear. The question now was, who was the man,

and who was it brought him the coronet?



“It is an old maxim of mine that when you have excluded the impossible,

whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth. Now, I knewthat it was not you who had brought it down, so there only remainedyour niece and the maids. But if it were the maids, why should your sonallow himself to be accused in their place? There could be no possiblereason. As he loved his cousin, however, there was an excellentexplanation why he should retain her secret—the more so as the secretwas a disgraceful one. When I remembered that you had seen her atthat window, and how she had fainted on seeing the coronet again, myconjecture became a certainty.



“And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently, forwho else could outweigh the love and gratitude which she must feel toyou? I knew that you went out little, and that your circle of friendswas a very limited one. But among them was Sir George Burnwell. I hadheard of him before as being a man of evil reputation among women. Itmust have been he who wore those boots and retained the missing gems.

Even though he knew that Arthur had discovered him, he might stillflatter himself that he was safe, for the lad could not say a wordwithout compromising his own family.



“Well, your own good sense will suggest what measures I took next. Iwent in the shape of a loafer to Sir George’s house, managed to pickup an acquaintance with his valet, learned that his master had cut hishead the night before, and, finally, at the expense of six shillings,

made all sure by buying a pair of his cast-off shoes. With these Ijourneyed down to Streatham, and saw that they exactly fitted thetracks.”







“I CLAPPED A PISTOL TO HIS HEAD”











“I saw an ill-dressed vagabond in the lane yesterday evening,” said Mr.

Holder.



“Precisely. It was I. I found that I had my man, so I came home andchanged my clothes. It was a delicate part which I had to play then,

for I saw that a prosecution must be avoided to avert scandal, and Iknew that so astute a villain would see that our hands were tied in thematter. I went and saw him. At first, of course, he denied everything.

But when I gave him every particular that had occurred, he tried tobluster, and took down a life-preserver from the wall. I knew my man,

however, and I clapped a pistol to his head before he could strike.

Then he became a little more reasonable. I told him that we would givehim a price for the stones he held—£1000 apiece. That brought out thefirst signs of grief that he had shown. ‘Why, dash it all!’ said he,

‘I’ve let them go at six hundred for the three!’ I soon managed to getthe address of the receiver who had them, on promising him that therewould be no prosecution. Off I set to him, and after much chaffering Igot our stones at £1000 apiece. Then I looked in upon your son, toldhim that all was right, and eventually got to my bed about two o’clock,

after what I may call a really hard day’s work.”



“A day which has saved England from a great public scandal,” said thebanker, rising. “Sir, I cannot find words to thank you, but you shallnot find me ungrateful for what you have done. Your skill has indeedexceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I must fly to my dear boyto apologize to him for the wrong which I have done him. As to what youtell me of poor Mary, it goes to my very heart. Not even your skill caninform me where she is now.”



“I think that we may safely say,” returned Holmes, “that she iswherever Sir George Burnwell is. It is equally certain, too, thatwhatever her sins are, they will soon receive a more than sufficientpunishment.”











Adventure XII

THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES











“TO the man who loves art for its own sake,” remarked Sherlock Holmes,

tossing aside the advertisement sheet of The Daily Telegraph, “it isfrequently in its least important and lowliest manifestations that thekeenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to observe,

Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in these littlerecords of our cases which you have been good enough to draw up, and, Iam bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have given prominencenot so much to the many causes célèbres and sensational trials inwhich I have figured, but rather to those incidents which may have beentrivial in themselves, but which have given room for those facultiesof deduction and of logical synthesis which I have made my specialprovince.”



“And yet,” said I, smiling, “I cannot quite hold myself absolved fromthe charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my records.”



“You have erred, perhaps,” he observed, taking up a glowing cinder withthe tongs, and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe which waswont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious, rather than ameditative mood—“you have erred perhaps in attempting to put color andlife into each of your statements, instead of confining yourself to thetask of placing upon record that severe reasoning from cause to effectwhich is really the only notable feature about the thing.”







“It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter,” Iremarked, with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism whichI had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend’ssingular character.



“No, it is not selfishness or conceit,” said he, answering, as was hiswont, my thoughts rather than my words. “If I claim full justice for myart, it is because it is an impersonal thing—a thing beyond myself.

Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the logic ratherthan upon the crime that you should dwell. You have degraded whatshould have been a course of lectures into a series of tales.”



It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfaston either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. Athick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-colored houses, and theopposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the heavyyellow wreaths. Our gas was lit, and shone on the white cloth andglimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared yet.

Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping continuouslyinto the advertisement columns of a succession of papers, until atlast, having apparently given up his search, he had emerged in no verysweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.



“At the same time,” he remarked, after a pause, during which he had satpuffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire, “you can hardlybe open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these cases which youhave been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fair proportion do nottreat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The small matter in which Iendeavored to help the King of Bohemia, the singular experience of MissMary Sutherland, the problem connected with the man with the twistedlip, and the incident of the noble bachelor, were all matters which areoutside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational, I fearthat you may have bordered on the trivial.”



“The end may have been so,” I answered, “but the methods I hold to havebeen novel and of interest.”



“Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the great unobservantpublic, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositor byhis left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis and deduction!

But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for the days ofthe great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man, has lost allenterprise and originality. As to my own little practice, it seems tobe degenerating into an agency for recovering lost lead pencils andgiving advice to young ladies from boarding-schools. I think that Ihave touched bottom at last, however. This note I had this morningmarks my zero-point, I fancy. Read it!” He tossed a crumpled letteracross to me.



It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and ranthus:



“Dear Mr. Holmes,—I am very anxious to consult you asto whether I should or should not accept a situation which hasbeen offered to me as governess. I shall call at half-past tento-morrow, if I do not inconvenience you.



“Yours faithfully, Violet Hunter.”











“Do you know the young lady?” I asked.



“Not I.”



“It is half-past ten now.”



“Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring.”



“It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You rememberthat the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere whimat first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so in thiscase, also.”



“Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, forhere, unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question.”



As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She wasplainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled like aplover’s egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had her ownway to make in the world.





“You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure,” said she, as mycompanion rose to greet her; “but I have had a very strange experience,

and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from whom I could askadvice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind enough to tell me whatI should do.”



“Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything that Ican to serve you.”



I could see that Holmes was favorably impressed by the manner andspeech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching fashion,

and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and his finger tipstogether, to listen to her story.



“I have been a governess for five years,” said she, “in the familyof Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received anappointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children overto America with him, so that I found myself without a situation. Iadvertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At lastthe little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was at mywits’ end as to what I should do.



“There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End calledWestaway’s, and there I used to call about once a week in order tosee whether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway wasthe name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed byMiss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies who areseeking employment wait in an ante-room, and are then shown in one byone, when she consults her ledgers, and sees whether she has anythingwhich would suit them.



“Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office asusual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiously stoutman with a very smiling face, and a great heavy chin which rolled downin fold upon fold over his throat, sat at her elbow with a pair ofglasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who entered.

As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair, and turned quickly toMiss Stoper:





“‘That will do,’ said he; ‘I could not ask for anything better. Capital!

capital!’ He seemed quite enthusiastic, and rubbed his hands togetherin the most genial fashion. He was such a comfortable-looking man thatit was quite a pleasure to look at him.



“‘You are looking for a situation, miss?’ he asked.



“‘Yes, sir.’



“‘As governess?’



“‘Yes, sir.’



“‘And what salary do you ask?’



“‘I had £4 a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.’



“‘Oh, tut, tut! sweating—rank sweating!’ he cried, throwing his fathands out into the air like a man who is in a boiling passion. ‘Howcould any one offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractionsand accomplishments?’



“‘My accomplishments, sir, may be less than you imagine,’ said I. ‘Alittle French, a little German, music, and drawing—’



“‘Tut, tut!’ he cried. ‘This is all quite beside the question. Thepoint is, have you or have you not the bearing and deportment of alady? There it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fittedfor the rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable partin the history of the country. But if you have, why, then, how couldany gentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything under the threefigures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at £100 a year.’



“You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such anoffer seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however, seeingperhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a pocket-book andtook out a note.



“‘It is also my custom,’ said he, smiling in the most pleasant fashionuntil his eyes were just two little shining slits amid the whitecreases of his face, ‘to advance to my young ladies half their salarybeforehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of their journeyand their wardrobe.’





“It seemed to me that I had never met so fascinating and so thoughtfula man. As I was already in debt to my tradesmen, the advance was agreat convenience, and yet there was something unnatural about thewhole transaction which made me wish to know a little more before Iquite committed myself.



“‘May I ask where you live, sir?’ said I.



“‘Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles on thefar side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dear younglady, and the dearest old country-house.’



“‘And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.’



“‘One child—one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you couldsee him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack! smack! Threegone before you could wink!’ He leaned back in his chair and laughedhis eyes into his head again.



“I was a little startled at the nature of the child’s amusement, butthe father’s laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.



“‘My sole duties, then,’ I asked, ‘are to take charge of a single child?’



“‘No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,’ he cried.

‘Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, toobey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that theywere such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see nodifficulty, heh?’



“‘I should be happy to make myself useful.’



“‘Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, youknow—faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress whichwe might give you, you would not object to our little whim. Heh?’



“‘No,’ said I, considerably astonished at his words.



“‘Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be offensive to you?’



“‘Oh, no.’





“‘Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us?’



“I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, myhair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint of chestnut.

It has been considered artistic. I could not dream of sacrificing it inthis off-hand fashion.



“‘I am afraid that that is quite impossible,’ said I. He had beenwatching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadowpass over his face as I spoke.



“‘I am afraid that it is quite essential,’ said he. ‘It is a littlefancy of my wife’s, and ladies’ fancies, you know, madam, ladies’fancies must be consulted. And so you won’t cut your hair?’



“‘No, sir, I really could not,’ I answered, firmly.



“‘Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It is a pity,

because in other respects you would really have done very nicely. Inthat case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your youngladies.’



“The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without aword to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much annoyanceupon her face that I could not help suspecting that she had lost ahandsome commission through my refusal.



“‘Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books?’ she asked.



“‘If you please, Miss Stoper.’



“‘Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the mostexcellent offers in this fashion,’ said she, sharply. ‘You can hardlyexpect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you.

Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.’ She struck a gong upon the table, and Iwas shown out by the page.



“Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found littleenough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table, I beganto ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing. After all,

if these people had strange fads, and expected obedience on the mostextraordinary matters, they were at least ready to pay for theireccentricity. Very few governesses in England are getting £100 ayear. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are improved bywearing it short, and perhaps I should be among the number. Next day Iwas inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the day afterI was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride, so far as to go backto the agency and inquire whether the place was still open, when Ireceived this letter from the gentleman himself. I have it here, and Iwill read it to you:



“‘The Copper Beeches, near Winchester.



“‘Dear Miss Hunter,—Miss Stoper has very kindly given me youraddress, and I write from here to ask you whether you havereconsidered your decision. My wife is very anxious that youshould come, for she has been much attracted by my descriptionof you. We are willing to give £30 a quarter, or £120 a year, soas to recompense you for any little inconvenience which our fadsmay cause you. They are not very exacting, after all. My wifeis fond of a particular shade of electric blue, and would likeyou to wear such a dress in-doors in the morning. You need not,

however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have onebelonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), whichwould, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sittinghere or there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, thatneed cause you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it isno doubt a pity, especially as I could not help remarking itsbeauty during our short interview, but I am afraid that I mustremain firm upon this point, and I only hope that the increasedsalary may recompense you for the loss. Your duties, as far asthe child is concerned, are very light. Now do try to come, andI shall meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me knowyour train.



Yours faithfully, Jephro Rucastle.’











“That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my mindis made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that beforetaking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter to yourconsideration.”



“Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles thequestion,” said Holmes, smiling.



“But you would not advise me to refuse?”



“I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see asister of mine apply for.”



“What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?”



“Ah, I have no data. I cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formedsome opinion?”



“Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr. Rucastleseemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not possible that hiswife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the matter quiet for fearshe should be taken to an asylum, and that he humors her fancies inevery way in order to prevent an outbreak.”



“That is a possible solution—in fact, as matters stand, it is the mostprobable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice householdfor a young lady.”



“But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!”



“Well, yes, of course the pay is good—too good. That is what makesme uneasy. Why should they give you £120 a year, when they could havetheir pick for £40? There must be some strong reason behind.”



“I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understandafterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if Ifelt that you were at the back of me.”



“Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that yourlittle problem promises to be the most interesting which has come myway for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some ofthe features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger—”



“Danger! What danger do you foresee?”



Holmes shook his head gravely. “It would cease to be a danger if wecould define it,” said he. “But at any time, day or night, a telegramwould bring me down to your help.”





“That is enough.” She rose briskly from her chair with the anxietyall swept from her face. “I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy inmy mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poorhair to-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow.” With a few gratefulwords to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off upon herway.



“At least,” said I, as we heard her quick, firm step descending thestairs, “she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to takecare of herself.”



“And she would need to be,” said Holmes, gravely; “I am much mistakenif we do not hear from her before many days are past.”



It was not very long before my friend’s prediction was fulfilled. Afortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts turningin her direction, and wondering what strange side-alley of humanexperience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual salary,

the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to somethingabnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the man werea philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers todetermine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for half anhour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he swept thematter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it. “Data! data!

data!” he cried, impatiently. “I can’t make bricks without clay.” Andyet he would always wind up by muttering that no sister of his shouldever have accepted such a situation.



The telegram which we eventually received came late one night, just asI was thinking of turning in, and Holmes was settling down to one ofthose all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in,

when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a test-tube at night,

and find him in the same position when I came down to breakfast inthe morning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then, glancing at themessage, threw it across to me.





“Just look up the trains in Bradshaw,” said he, and turned back to hischemical studies.



The summons was a brief and urgent one.



“Please be at the ‘Black Swan’ Hotel at Winchester atmid-day to-morrow,” it said. “Do come! I am at my wits’end.



HUNTER.”











“Will you come with me?” asked Holmes, glancing up.



“I should wish to.”



“Just look it up, then.”



“There is a train at half-past nine,” said I, glancing over myBradshaw. “It is due at Winchester at 11.30.”



“That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone myanalysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in themorning.”







By eleven o’clock the next day we were well upon our way to the oldEnglish capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all theway down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw themdown, and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, alight blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drifting acrossfrom west to east. The sun was shining very brightly, and yet there wasan exhilarating nip in the air, which set an edge to a man’s energy.

All over the country-side, away to the rolling hills around Aldershot,

the little red and gray roofs of the farm-steadings peeped out fromamid the light green of the new foliage.



“Are they not fresh and beautiful?” I cried, with all the enthusiasm ofa man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.



But Holmes shook his head gravely.



“Do you know, Watson,” said he, “that it is one of the curses of a mindwith a turn like mine that I must look at everything with reference tomy own special subject. You look at these scattered houses, and you areimpressed by their beauty. I look at them, and the only thought whichcomes to me is a feeling of their isolation and of the impunity withwhich crime may be committed there.”



“Good heavens!” I cried. “Who would associate crime with these dear oldhomesteads?”



“They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson,

founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in Londondo not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the smiling andbeautiful country-side.”



“You horrify me!”



“But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion cando in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane sovile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard’sblow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbors, andthen the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word ofcomplaint can set it going, and there is but a step between the crimeand the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own fields,

filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know little ofthe law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden wickednesswhich may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and none the wiser.

Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live in Winchester, Ishould never have had a fear for her. It is the five miles of countrywhich makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she is not personallythreatened.”



“No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away.”



“Quite so. She has her freedom.”



“What can be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?”



“I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would coverthe facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct canonly be determined by the fresh information which we shall no doubtfind waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral, and weshall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell.”



The “Black Swan” is an inn of repute in the High Street, at nodistance from the station, and there we found the young lady waitingfor us. She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us uponthe table.



“I am so delighted that you have come,” she said, earnestly. “It is sovery kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do. Youradvice will be altogether invaluable to me.”



“Pray tell us what has happened to you.”



“I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle tobe back before three. I got his leave to come into town this morning,

though he little knew for what purpose.”



“Let us have everything in its due order.” Holmes thrust his long thinlegs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.



“In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with noactual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair tothem to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in mymind about them.”



“What can you not understand?”



“Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just asit occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here, and drove mein his dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifullysituated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large squareblock of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with dampand bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides, andon the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southampton high-road,

which curves past about a hundred yards from the front door. Thisground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all round are partof Lord Southerton’s preserves. A clump of copper beeches immediatelyin front of the hall door has given its name to the place.







“‘I AM SO DELIGHTED THAT YOU HAVE COME’”













“I was driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever, and wasintroduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. There was notruth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us to be probablein your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. I found herto be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than her husband, notmore than thirty, I should think, while he can hardly be less thanforty-five. From their conversation I have gathered that they have beenmarried about seven years, that he was a widower, and that his onlychild by the first wife was the daughter who has gone to Philadelphia.

Mr. Rucastle told me in private that the reason why she had left themwas that she had an unreasoning aversion to her step-mother. As thedaughter could not have been less than twenty, I can quite imagine thather position must have been uncomfortable with her father’s young wife.



“Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colorless in mind as well as infeature. She impressed me neither favorably nor the reverse. She was anonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted bothto her husband and to her little son. Her light gray eyes wanderedcontinually from one to the other, noting every little want andforestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in his bluff,



boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy couple.

And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would often be lostin deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face. More than once Ihave surprised her in tears. I have thought sometimes that it was thedisposition of her child which weighed upon her mind, for I have nevermet so utterly spoilt and so ill-natured a little creature. He is smallfor his age, with a head which is quite disproportionately large. Hiswhole life appears to be spent in an alternation between savage fits ofpassion and gloomy intervals of sulking. Giving pain to any creatureweaker than himself seems to be his one idea of amusement, and heshows quite remarkable talent in planning the capture of mice, littlebirds, and insects. But I would rather not talk about the creature, Mr.

Holmes, and, indeed, he has little to do with my story.”







“I am glad of all details,” remarked my friend, “whether they seem toyou to be relevant or not.”



“I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasantthing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearanceand conduct of the servants. There are only two, a man and his wife.

Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzledhair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I havebeen with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed totake no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong woman with asour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle, and much less amiable. They area most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my time inthe nursery and my own room, which are next to each other in one cornerof the building.



“For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was veryquiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast andwhispered something to her husband.



“‘Oh yes,’ said he, turning to me; ‘we are very much obliged to you,

Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your hair.

I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from yourappearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will becomeyou. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, and if youwould be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely obliged.’



“The dress which I found waiting for me was of a peculiar shade ofblue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it boreunmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have beena better fit if I had been measured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs. Rucastleexpressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quite exaggeratedin its vehemence. They were waiting for me in the drawing-room, whichis a very large room, stretching along the entire front of the house,

with three long windows reaching down to the floor. A chair had beenplaced close to the central window, with its back turned towards it. Inthis I was asked to sit, and then Mr. Rucastle, walking up and down onthe other side of the room, began to tell me a series of the funnieststories that I have ever listened to. You cannot imagine how comical hewas, and I laughed until I was quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, whohas evidently no sense of humor, never so much as smiled, but sat withher hands in her lap, and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After anhour or so, Mr. Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time to commencethe duties of the day, and that I might change my dress and go tolittle Edward in the nursery.



“Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactlysimilar circumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in thewindow, and again I laughed very heartily at the funny stories of whichmy employer had an immense répertoire, and which he told inimitably.

Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and, moving my chair a littlesideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the page, he begged meto read aloud to him. I read for about ten minutes, beginning in theheart of a chapter, and then suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, heordered me to cease and to change my dress.



“You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became as to whatthe meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be. Theywere always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from thewindow, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was goingon behind my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I soondevised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy thoughtseized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my handkerchief. Onthe next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, I put my handkerchiefup to my eyes, and was able with a little management to see all thatthere was behind me. I confess that I was disappointed. There wasnothing. At least that was my first impression. At the second glance,

however, I perceived that there was a man standing in the SouthamptonRoad, a small bearded man in a gray suit, who seemed to be looking inmy direction. The road is an important highway, and there are usuallypeople there. This man, however, was leaning against the railingswhich bordered our field, and was looking earnestly up. I lowered myhandkerchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle, to find her eyes fixed uponme with a most searching gaze. She said nothing, but I am convincedthat she had divined that I had a mirror in my hand, and had seen whatwas behind me. She rose at once.



“‘Jephro,’ said she, ‘there is an impertinent fellow upon the roadthere who stares up at Miss Hunter.’



“‘No friend of yours, Miss Hunter?’ he asked.



“‘No; I know no one in these parts.’



“‘Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round and motion to him togo away.’



“‘Surely it would be better to take no notice.’



“‘No, no, we should have him loitering here always. Kindly turn roundand wave him away like that.’



“I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew downthe blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat againin the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man in theroad.”



“Pray continue,” said Holmes. “Your narrative promises to be a mostinteresting one.”



“You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove tobe little relation between the different incidents of which I speak.

On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastletook me to a small out-house which stands near the kitchen door. As weapproached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound asof a large animal moving about.



“‘Look in here!’ said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between twoplanks. ‘Is he not a beauty?’



“I looked through, and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of avague figure huddled up in the darkness.



“‘Don’t be frightened,’ said my employer, laughing at the start which Ihad given. ‘It’s only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but reallyold Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with him. Wefeed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is always askeen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God help thetrespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness’ sake don’t youever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at night, for itis as much as your life is worth.’



“The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to lookout of my bedroom window about two o’clock in the morning. It was abeautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house wassilvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing,

rapt inthe peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something wasmoving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into themoonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf,

tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projectingbones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadowupon the other side. That dreadful silent sentinel sent a chill to myheart which I do not think that any burglar could have done.



“And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as youknow, cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it in a great coilat the bottom of my trunk. One evening, after the child was in bed,

I began to amuse myself by examining the furniture of my room and byrearranging my own little things. There was an old chest of drawersin the room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one locked.

I had filled the first two with my linen, and, as I had still muchto pack away, I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of thethird drawer. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mereoversight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. Thevery first key fitted to perfection, and I drew the drawer open. Therewas only one thing in it, but I am sure that you would never guess whatit was. It was my coil of hair.







“I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiar tint, andthe same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtrudeditself upon me. How could my hair have been locked in the drawer?

With trembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the contents, anddrew from the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together, andI assure you that they were identical. Was it not extraordinary? Puzzleas I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I returnedthe strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing of the matter to theRucastles, as I felt that I had put myself in the wrong by opening adrawer which they had locked.



“I am naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, and Isoon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There wasone wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all. A doorwhich faced that which led into the quarters of the Tollers openedinto this suite, but it was invariably locked. One day, however, as Iascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out through this door,

his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which made him a verydifferent person to the round, jovial man to whom I was accustomed. Hischeeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with anger, and the veinsstood out at his temples with passion. He locked the door and hurriedpast me without a word or a look.



“This aroused my curiosity; so when I went out for a walk in thegrounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I couldsee the windows of this part of the house. There were four of them in arow, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth was shutteredup. They were evidently all deserted. As I strolled up and down,

glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me, looking asmerry and jovial as ever.



“‘Ah!’ said he, ‘you must not think me rude if I passed you without aword, my dear young lady. I was preoccupied with business matters.’



“I assured him that I was not offended. ‘By-the-way,’ said I, ‘youseem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them hasthe shutters up.’



“He looked surprised, and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at myremark.



“‘Photography is one of my hobbies,’ said he. ‘I have made my dark roomup there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have come upon.

Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed it?’ He spokein a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as he looked atme. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.



“Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I understood that there wassomething about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was allon fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity, though I have myshare of that. It was more a feeling of duty—a feeling that some goodmight come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of woman’sinstinct; perhaps it was woman’s instinct which gave me that feeling.

At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout for anychance to pass the forbidden door.



“It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that,

besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to do inthese deserted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large black linenbag with him through the door. Recently he has been drinking hard, andyesterday evening he was very drunk; and, when I came up-stairs, therewas the key in the door. I have no doubt at all that he had left itthere. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both down-stairs, and the child waswith them, so that I had an admirable opportunity. I turned the keygently in the lock, opened the door, and slipped through.



“There was a little passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted,

which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this cornerwere three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open.

They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with two windowsin the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the eveninglight glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was closed, andacross the outside of it had been fastened one of the broad bars ofan iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the wall, and fastenedat the other with stout cord. The door itself was locked as well, andthe key was not there. This barricaded door corresponded clearly withthe shuttered window outside, and yet I could see by the glimmer frombeneath it that the room was not in darkness. Evidently there was askylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the passagegazing at the sinister door, and wondering what secret it might veil,

I suddenly heard the sound of steps within the room, and saw a shadowpass backward and forward against the little slit of dim light whichshone out from under the door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up inme at the sight, Mr. Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly,

and I turned and ran—ran as though some dreadful hand were behind meclutching at the skirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, throughthe door, and straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waitingoutside.



“‘So,’ said he, smiling, ‘it was you, then. I thought that it must bewhen I saw the door open.’



“‘Oh, I am so frightened!’ I panted.



“‘My dear young lady! my dear young lady!’—you cannot think howcaressing and soothing his manner was—‘and what has frightened you, mydear young lady?’



“But his voice was just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. I waskeenly on my guard against him.



“‘I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,’ I answered. ‘But itis so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and ranout again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!’



“‘Only that?’ said he, looking at me keenly.



“‘Why, what did you think?’ I asked.



“‘Why do you think that I lock this door?’



“‘I am sure that I do not know.’



“‘It is to keep people out who have no business there. Do you see?’ Hewas still smiling in the most amiable manner.



“‘I am sure if I had known—’



“‘Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over thatthreshold again—’ here in an instant the smile hardened into a grin ofrage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon—‘I’ll throwyou to the mastiff.’



“I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that Imust have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until Ifound myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of you,

Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. I wasfrightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the servants,

even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could only bringyou down all would be well. Of course I might have fled from the house,

but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My mind was soonmade up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and cloak, went downto the office, which is about half a mile from the house, and thenreturned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt came into my mindas I approached the door lest the dog might be loose, but I rememberedthat Toller had drunk himself into a state of insensibility thatevening, and I knew that he was the only one in the household who hadany influence with the savage creature, or who would venture to set himfree. I slipped in in safety, and lay awake half the night in my joy atthe thought of seeing you. I had no difficulty in getting leave to comeinto Winchester this morning, but I must be back before three o’clock,

for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle are going on a visit, and will be away allthe evening, so that I must look after the child. Now I have told youall my adventures, Mr. Holmes, and I should be very glad if you couldtell me what it all means, and, above all, what I should do.”



Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. Myfriend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in hispockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his face.



“Is Toller still drunk?” he asked.



“Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothingwith him.”



“That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?”



“Yes.”



“Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?”



“Yes, the wine-cellar.”



“You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very braveand sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could perform onemore feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think you a quiteexceptional woman.”



“I will try. What is it?”



“We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o’clock, my friend and I.

The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, beincapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm. Ifyou could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn thekey upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely.”



“I will do it.”



“Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of coursethere is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought there topersonate some one, and the real person is imprisoned in this chamber.

That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt that it isthe daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right, who was saidto have gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as resembling herin height, figure, and the color of your hair. Hers had been cut off,

very possibly in some illness through which she has passed, and so, ofcourse, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a curious chance you cameupon her tresses. The man in the road was, undoubtedly, some friend ofhers—possibly her fiancé—and no doubt, as you wore the girl’s dressand were so like her, he was convinced from your laughter, wheneverhe saw you, and afterwards from your gesture, that Miss Rucastle wasperfectly happy, and that she no longer desired his attentions. The dogis let loose at night to prevent him from endeavoring to communicatewith her. So much is fairly clear. The most serious point in the caseis the disposition of the child.”



“What on earth has that to do with it?” I ejaculated.



“My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light asto the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don’t you seethat the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained my firstreal insight into the character of parents by studying their children.

This child’s disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for cruelty’ssake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father, as I shouldsuspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor girl who is intheir power.”



“I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes,” cried our client. “Athousand things come back to me which make me certain that you havehit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poorcreature.”



“We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man. Wecan do nothing until seven o’clock. At that hour we shall be with you,

and it will not be long before we solve the mystery.”



We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached theCopper Beeches, having put up our trap at a way-side public-house. Thegroup of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnished metal inthe light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark the house evenhad Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the door-step.



“Have you managed it?” asked Holmes.



A loud thudding noise came from somewhere down-stairs. “That isMrs. Toller in the cellar,” said she. “Her husband lies snoring onthe kitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr.

Rucastle’s.”



“You have done well indeed!” cried Holmes, with enthusiasm. “Now leadthe way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business.”





We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a passage,

and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss Hunter haddescribed. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse bar. Then hetried the various keys in the lock, but without success. No sound camefrom within, and at the silence Holmes’s face clouded over.



“I trust that we are not too late,” said he. “I think, Miss Hunter,

that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder toit, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in.”



It was an old rickety door, and gave at once before our unitedstrength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There was nofurniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basketful oflinen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.



“There has been some villainy here,” said Holmes; “this beauty hasguessed Miss Hunter’s intentions, and has carried his victim off.”



“But how?”



“Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it.” He swunghimself up onto the roof. “Ah, yes,” he cried; “here’s the end of along light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it.”



“But it is impossible,” said Miss Hunter; “the ladder was not therewhen the Rucastles went away.”



“He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever anddangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were hewhose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it would beas well for you to have your pistol ready.”



The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at thedoor of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in hishand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight ofhim, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.



“You villain!” said he, “where’s your daughter?”





The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.



“It is for me to ask you that,” he shrieked, “you thieves! Spies andthieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I’ll serveyou!” He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.



“He’s gone for the dog!” cried Miss Hunter.



“I have my revolver,” said I.



“Better close the front door,” cried Holmes, and we all rushed downthe stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard thebaying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horrible worryingsound which it was dreadful to listen to. An elderly man with a redface and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.



“My God!” he cried. “Some one has loosed the dog. It’s not been fed fortwo days. Quick, quick, or it’ll be too late!”



Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Tollerhurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its black muzzleburied in Rucastle’s throat, while he writhed and screamed upon theground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over with itskeen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his neck. Withmuch labor we separated them, and carried him, living but horriblymangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room sofa, and,

having despatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to his wife, Idid what I could to relieve his pain. We were all assembled round himwhen the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman entered the room.



“Mrs. Toller!” cried Miss Hunter.



“Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he wentup to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn’t let me know what you wereplanning, for I would have told you that your pains were wasted.”



“Ha!” said Holmes, looking keenly at her. “It is clear that Mrs. Tollerknows more about this matter than any one else.”





“Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know.”



“Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it, for there are several pointson which I must confess that I am still in the dark.”



“I will soon make it clear to you,” said she; “and I’d have doneso before now if I could ha’ got out from the cellar. If there’spolice-court business over this, you’ll remember that I was the onethat stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice’s friend too.



“She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn’t, from the time thather father married again. She was slighted like, and had no say inanything; but it never really became bad for her until after she metMr. Fowler at a friend’s house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alicehad rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, shewas, that she never said a word about them, but just left everything inMr. Rucastle’s hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there wasa chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that thelaw would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop onit. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married or not,

he could use her money. When she wouldn’t do it, he kept on worryingher until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was at death’s door.

Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and with herbeautiful hair cut off; but that didn’t make no change in her youngman, and he stuck to her as true as man could be.”



“Ah,” said Holmes, “I think that what you have been good enough totell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce allthat remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system ofimprisonment?”



“Yes, sir.”



“And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of thedisagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler.”



“That was it, sir.”



“But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman shouldbe, blockaded the house, and, having met you, succeeded by certainarguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your interestswere the same as his.”



“Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman,” said Mrs.

Toller, serenely.



“And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want ofdrink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your masterhad gone out.”



“You have it, sir, just as it happened.”



“I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller,” said Holmes, “for youhave certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comesthe country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we hadbest escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me that ourlocus standi now is rather a questionable one.”



And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copperbeeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always abroken man, kept alive solely through the care of his devoted wife.

They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much ofRucastle’s past life that he finds it difficult to part from them.

Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, inSouthampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of aGovernment appointment in the Island of Mauritius. As to Miss VioletHunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested nofurther interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre ofone of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school atWalsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.



THE END








BY W. D. HOWELLS.







THE QUALITY OF MERCY. A Novel. 12mo, Cloth, $1 50; Paper,

75 cents.



AN IMPERATIVE DUTY. A Novel. 12mo, Cloth, $1 00.



A HAZARD OF NEW FORTUNES. A Novel. 2 Volumes. 12mo, Cloth,

$2 00; Illustrated. 12mo, Paper, $1 00.



THE SHADOW OF A DREAM. A Story. 12mo, Cloth, $1 00; Paper,

50 cents.



ANNIE KILBURN. A Novel. 12mo, Cloth, $1 50; Paper, 75 cents.



APRIL HOPES. A Novel. 12mo, Cloth, $1 50; Paper, 75 cents.



CHRISTMAS EVERY DAY, and Other Stories. Illustrated. Post 8vo,

Cloth, $1 25.



A BOY’S TOWN. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1 25.



CRITICISM AND FICTION. With Portrait. 16mo, Cloth, $1 00.



MODERN ITALIAN POETS. With Portraits. 12mo, Half Cloth, $2 00.



THE MOUSE-TRAP, and Other Farces. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth,

$1 00.



A LETTER OF INTRODUCTION. A Farce. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth,

50 cents.



A LITTLE SWISS SOJOURN. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents.



THE ALBANY DEPOT. A Farce. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents.



THE GARROTERS. A Farce. Illustrated. 32mo, Cloth, 50 cents.







Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.



☛-->The above works are for sale by all booksellers, or will be sentby the publishers, postage prepaid, to any part of the United States,

Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.











R. D. BLACKMORE’S NOVELS.







His descriptions are wonderfully vivid and natural. His pages arebrightened everywhere with great humor; the quaint, dry turns ofthought remind you occasionally of Fielding.—London Times.



Mr. Blackmore always writes like a scholar and agentleman—Athenæum, London.



His tales, all of them, are pre-eminently meritorious. They areremarkable for their careful elaboration, the conscientious finish oftheir workmanship, their affluence of striking dramatic and narrativeincident, their close observation and general interpretation of nature,

their profusion of picturesque description, and their quiet andsustained humor. Besides, they are pervaded by a bright and elasticatmosphere which diffuses a cheery feeling of healthful and robustvigor. While they charm us by their sprightly vivacity and theirnaturalness, they never in the slightest degree transcend the limitsof delicacy or good taste. While radiating warmth and brightness, theyare as pure as the new-fallen snow.... Their literary execution isadmirable, and their dramatic power is as exceptional as their moralpurity.—Christian Intelligencer, N. Y.



LORNA DOONE. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1 00; 8vo, Paper,

40 cents.



KIT AND KITTY. 12mo, Cloth, $1 25; Paper, 35 cents.



SPRINGHAVEN. Illustrated. 12mo, Cloth, $1 50; 4to, Paper,

25 cents.



CHRISTOWELL. 4to, Paper, 20 cents.



CRADOCK NOWELL. 8vo, Paper, 60 cents.



EREMA; or, My Father’s Sin. 8vo, Paper, 50 cents.



MARY ANERLEY. 16mo, Cloth, $1 00; 4to, Paper, 15 cents.



TOMMY UPMORE. 16mo, Cloth, 50 cents; Paper, 35 cents; 4to,

Paper, 20 cents.







Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.



☛-->Any of the above works will be sent by mail, postage prepaid,

to any part of the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt ofthe price.











By CAPT. CHARLES KING.







CAMPAIGNING WITH CROOK, AND STORIES OF ARMY LIFE. Post 8vo,

Cloth, $1 25.



A WAR-TIME WOOING. Illustrated by R. F. Zogbaum. pp. iv.,

196. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1 00.



BETWEEN THE LINES. A Story of the War. Illustrated by GilbertGaul. pp. iv., 312. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1 25.



In all of Captain King’s stories the author holds to lofty ideals ofmanhood and womanhood, and inculcates the lessons of honor, generosity,

courage, and self-control.—Literary World, Boston.



The vivacity and charm which signally distinguish Captain King’spen.... He occupies a position in American literature entirelyhis own.... His is the literature of honest sentiment, pure andtender.—N. Y. Press.



A romance by Captain King is always a pleasure, because he has socomplete a mastery of the subjects with which he deals.... CaptainKing has few rivals in his domain.... The general tone of CaptainKing’s stories is highly commendable. The heroes are simple, frank,

and soldierly; the heroines are dignified and maidenly in the mostunconventional situations.—Epoch, N. Y.



All Captain King’s stories are full of spirit and with the true ringabout them.—Philadelphia Item.



Captain King’s stories of army life are so brilliant and intense, theyhave such a ring of true experience, and his characters are so lifelikeand vivid that the announcement of a new one is always received withpleasure.—New Haven Palladium.



Captain King is a delightful story-teller.—Washington Post.



In the delineation of war scenes Captain King’s style is crisp andvigorous, inspiring in the breast of the reader a thrill of genuinepatriotic fervor.—Boston Commonwealth.



Captain King is almost without a rival in the field he has chosen....

His style is at once vigorous and sentimental in the best sense of thatword, so that his novels are pleasing to young men as well as youngwomen.—Pittsburgh Bulletin.



It is good to think that there is at least one man who believes thatall the spirit of romance and chivalry has not yet died out of theworld, and that there are as brave and honest hearts to-day as therewere in the days of knights and paladins.—Philadelphia Record.







Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.



☛-->Any of the above works sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any partof the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.











BEN-HUR: A TALE OF THE CHRIST.







By Lew. Wallace. 16mo, Cloth, $1 50. Garfield Edition.

Two Volumes. Twenty Full-page Photogravures. Over 1000Illustrations as Marginal Drawings by William Martin Johnson.

Crown 8vo, Printed on Fine Super-calendered Plate-paper, UncutEdges and Gilt Tops, Bound in Silk and Gold, $7 00. (In aGladstone Box.)



Anything so startling, new, and distinctive as the leading feature ofthis romance does not often appear in works of fiction.... Some of Mr.

Wallace’s writing is remarkable for its pathetic eloquence. The scenesdescribed in the New Testament are rewritten with the power and skillof an accomplished master of style.—N. Y. Times.



Its real basis is a description of the life of the Jews and Romansat the beginning of the Christian era, and this is both forcible andbrilliant.... We are carried through a surprising variety of scenes;we witness a sea-fight, a chariot-race, the internal economy of aRoman galley, domestic interiors at Antioch, at Jerusalem, and amongthe tribes of the desert; palaces, prisons, the haunts of dissipatedRoman youth, the houses of pious families of Israel. There is plenty ofexciting incident; everything is animated, vivid and glowing.—N. Y.

Tribune.



From the opening of the volume to the very close the reader’s interestwill be kept at the highest pitch, and the novel will be pronounced byall one of the greatest novels of the day.—Boston Post.



“Ben Hur” is interesting, and its characterization is fine and strong.

Meanwhile it evinces careful study of the period in which the sceneis laid, and will help those who read it with reasonable attention torealize the nature and conditions of Hebrew life in Jerusalem and Romanlife at Antioch at the time of our Saviour’s advent.—Examiner, N. Y.



The book is one of unquestionable power, and will be read with unwontedinterest by many readers who are weary of the conventional novel andromance.—Boston Journal.



One of the most remarkable and delightful books. It is as real andwarm as life itself, and as attractive as the grandest and most heroicchapters of history.—Indianapolis Journal.







Published by HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.



☛-->The above work will be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to any partof the United States, Canada, or Mexico, on receipt of the price.















Transcriber’s Note:



The text published in the original publication has beenpreserved except as follows:



Punctuation has been standardised.



Page 5scored by six almost paralled changed toscored by six almost parallel



Page 20  Sherlock Holmes’ succinct description changed to  Sherlock Holmes’s succinct description



Page 37  injustice to hestitate changed to  injustice to hesitate



Page 46  I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped changed to  I saw him that afternoon so enrapt



Page 81  his had the natural ef-effect changed to  his had the natural effect



Page 87  brother and siser; but of course changed to  brother and sister; but of course



Page 93  at this. Men who had only know _changed to_as this. Men who had only know changed to



Page 148  and we very all quietly entered changed to  and we all very quietly entered



Page 156  had remarked, the initals “H. B.” changed to  had remarked, the initials “H. B.”



Page 161  If this fail changed to  If this fails



Page 174  Gone to the dealer’s, Jim changed to  Gone to the dealer’s, Jem



Page 185  delirum, sometimes that it changed todelirium, sometimes that it



Page 192  The centra portion was in changed to  The central portion was in



Page 200  waiting silently for for whatever changed to  waiting silently for whatever



Page 215  save the occasional bright blurr changed to  save the occasional bright blur



Page 245  a pâtè de foie gras pie changed to  a pâté de foie gras pie



Page 250  permision, I will now wish changed topermission, I will now wish



Page 293  boisterious fashion, and on the whole changed toboisterous fashion, and on the whole



Page 297  wrapt in the peaceful beauty changed torapt in the peaceful beauty
















*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES ***





Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.







Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.





START: FULL LICENSE



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK





To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.







Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works





1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.







1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.







1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,

displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.







1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,

check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,

distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.







1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:





1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,

performed, viewed, copied or distributed:





This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.











1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.







1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.







1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.







1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.







1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.







1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.







1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:



• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”



• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.





• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.





• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.











1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.







1.F.







1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.







1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.







1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.







1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.







1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.







1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,

including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.







Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™





Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.







Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.







Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation





The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.







The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,

Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact





Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation





Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.







The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.







While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.







International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.







Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate





Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works





Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.







Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.







Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.







This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,

including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.









